Flavor network and the principles of food
pairing
SUBJECT AREAS:
STATISTICAL PHYSICS,
THERMODYNAMICS AND
NONLINEAR DYNAMICS
APPLIED PHYSICS
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
STATISTICS

Received
18 October 2011
Accepted
24 November 2011
Published
15 December 2011

Correspondence and
requests for materials
should be addressed to
S.E.A. (sea31@cam.
ac.uk) or A.L.B. (alb@
neu.edu)

* These authors
contributed equally to
this work.

Yong-Yeol Ahn1,2,3*, Sebastian E. Ahnert1,4*, James P. Bagrow1,2 & Albert-László Barabási1,2
1

Center for Complex Network Research, Department of Physics Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, 2Center for Cancer
Systems Biology Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, 3School of Informatics and Computing
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408, 4Theory of Condensed Matter, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK.

The cultural diversity of culinary practice, as illustrated by the variety of regional cuisines, raises the question
of whether there are any general patterns that determine the ingredient combinations used in food today or
principles that transcend individual tastes and recipes. We introduce a flavor network that captures the flavor
compounds shared by culinary ingredients. Western cuisines show a tendency to use ingredient pairs that share
many flavor compounds, supporting the so-called food pairing hypothesis. By contrast, East Asian cuisines tend
to avoid compound sharing ingredients. Given the increasing availability of information on food preparation,
our data-driven investigation opens new avenues towards a systematic understanding of culinary practice.

A

s omnivores, humans have historically faced the difficult task of identifying and gathering food that
satisfies nutritional needs while avoiding foodborne illnesses1. This process has contributed to the current
diet of humans, which is influenced by factors ranging from an evolved preference for sugar and fat to
palatability, nutritional value, culture, ease of production, and climate1–9. The relatively small number of recipes
in use (,106, e.g. http://cookpad.com) compared to the enormous number of potential recipes (.1015, see
Supplementary Information Sec S1.2), together with the frequent recurrence of particular combinations in
various regional cuisines, indicates that we are exploiting but a tiny fraction of the potential combinations.
Although this pattern itself can be explained by a simple evolutionary model10 or data-driven approaches11, a
fundamental question still remains: are there any quantifiable and reproducible principles behind our choice of
certain ingredient combinations and avoidance of others?
Although many factors such as colors, texture, temperature, and sound play an important role in food
sensation12–15, palatability is largely determined by flavor, representing a group of sensations including odors
(due to molecules that can bind olfactory receptors), tastes (due to molecules that stimulate taste buds), and
freshness or pungency (trigeminal senses)16. Therefore, the flavor compound (chemical) profile of the culinary
ingredients is a natural starting point for a systematic search for principles that might underlie our choice of
acceptable ingredient combinations.
A hypothesis, which over the past decade has received attention among some chefs and food scientists, states that
ingredients sharing flavor compounds are more likely to taste well together than ingredients that do not17 (also see
http://www.foodpairing.com). This food pairing hypothesis has been used to search for novel ingredient combinations and has prompted, for example, some contemporary restaurants to combine white chocolate and caviar, as they
share trimethylamine and other flavor compounds, or chocolate and blue cheese that share at least 73 flavor
compounds. As we search for evidence supporting (or refuting) any ‘rules’ that may underlie our recipes, we must
bear in mind that the scientific analysis of any art, including the art of cooking, is unlikely to be capable of explaining
every aspect of the artistic creativity involved. Furthermore, there are many ingredients whose main role in a recipe
may not be only flavoring but something else as well (e.g. eggs’ role to ensure mechanical stability or paprika’s role to
add vivid colors). Finally, the flavor of a dish owes as much to the mode of preparation as to the choice of particular
ingredients12,18,19. However, our hypothesis is that, given the large number of recipes we use in our analysis (56,498),
such factors can be systematically filtered out, allowing for the discovery of patterns that may transcend specific
dishes or ingredients.
Here we introduce a network-based approach to explore the impact of flavor compounds on ingredient
combinations. Efforts by food chemists to identify the flavor compounds contained in most culinary ingredients
allows us to link each ingredient to 51 flavor compounds on average20 1. We build a bipartite network21–26
1

While finalizing this manuscript, an updated edition (6th Ed.) of Fenaroli’s handbook of flavor ingredients has been released.

SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

1

www.nature.com/scientificreports

Figure 1 | Flavor network. (A) The ingredients contained in two recipes (left column), together with the flavor compounds that are known to be present
in the ingredients (right column). Each flavor compound is linked to the ingredients that contain it, forming a bipartite network. Some compounds
(shown in boldface) are shared by multiple ingredients. (B) If we project the ingredient-compound bipartite network into the ingredient space, we obtain
the flavor network, whose nodes are ingredients, linked if they share at least one flavor compound. The thickness of links represents the number of flavor
compounds two ingredients share and the size of each circle corresponds to the prevalence of the ingredients in recipes. (C) The distribution of recipe size,
capturing the number of ingredients per recipe, across the five cuisines explored in our study. (D) The frequency-rank plot of ingredients across the five
cuisines show an approximately invariant distribution across cuisines.

consisting of two different types of nodes: (i) 381 ingredients used in
recipes throughout the world, and (ii) 1,021 flavor compounds that
are known to contribute to the flavor of each of these ingredients
(Fig. 1A). A projection of this bipartite network is the flavor network
in which two nodes (ingredients) are connected if they share at least
one flavor compound (Fig. 1B). The weight of each link represents
the number of shared flavor compounds, turning the flavor network
into a weighted network27,22,23. While the compound concentration in
each ingredient and the detection threshold of each compound
should ideally be taken into account, the lack of systematic data
prevents us from exploring their impact (see Sec S1.1.2 on data
limitations).
Since several flavor compounds are shared by a large number of
ingredients, the resulting flavor network is too dense for direct visualization (average degree hki^214). We therefore use a backbone
extraction method28,29 to identify the statistically significant links for
each ingredient given the sum of weights characterizing the particular node (Fig. 2), see SI for details). Not surprisingly, each module in
the network corresponds to a distinct food class such as meats (red)
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

or fruits (yellow). The links between modules inform us of the flavor
compounds that hold different classes of foods together. For
instance, fruits and dairy products are close to alcoholic drinks,
and mushrooms appear isolated, as they share a statistically significant number of flavor compounds only with other mushrooms.
The flavor network allows us to reformulate the food pairing
hypothesis as a topological property: do we more frequently use
ingredient pairs that are strongly linked in the flavor network or
do we avoid them? To test this hypothesis we need data on ingredient
combinations preferred by humans, information readily available in
the current body of recipes. For generality, we used 56,498 recipes
provided by two American repositories (epicurious.com and allrecipes.com) and to avoid a distinctly Western interpretation of the
world’s cuisine, we also used a Korean repository (menupan.com).
The recipes are grouped into geographically distinct cuisines (North
American,Western European, Southern European, Latin American,
and East Asian; see Fig. 1 and Table S2). The average number of
ingredients used in a recipe is around eight, and the overall distribution is bounded (Fig. 1C), indicating that recipes with a very large
2

www.nature.com/scientificreports

Figure 2 | The backbone of the flavor network. Each node denotes an ingredient, the node color indicates food category, and node size reflects the
ingredient prevalence in recipes. Two ingredients are connected if they share a significant number of flavor compounds, link thickness representing the
number of shared compounds between the two ingredients. Adjacent links are bundled to reduce the clutter. Note that the map shows only the statistically
significant links, as identified by the algorithm of Refs.28,29 for p-value 0.04. A drawing of the full network is too dense to be informative. We use, however,
the full network in our subsequent measurements.

or very small number of ingredients are rare. By contrast, the popularity of specific ingredients varies over four orders of magnitude,
documenting huge differences in how frequently various ingredients
are used in recipes (Fig. 1D), as observed in10. For example, jasmine
tea, Jamaican rum, and 14 other ingredients are each found in only a
single recipe (see SI S1.2), but egg appears in as many as 20,951, more
than one third of all recipes.

Results
Figure 3D indicates that North American and Western European
cuisines exhibit a statistically significant tendency towards recipes
whose ingredients share flavor compounds. By contrast, East Asian
and Southern European cuisines avoid recipes whose ingredients
share flavor compounds (see Fig. 3D for the Z-score, capturing the
statistical significance of DNs). The systematic difference between the
East Asian and
American recipes is particularly clear if we
 the North

inspect the P Nsrand distribution of the randomized recipe dataset,
compared to the observed number of shared compunds characterizing the two cuisines, Ns. This distribution reveals that North
American dishes use far more compound-sharing pairs than
expected by chance (Fig. 3E), and the East Asian dishes far fewer
(Fig. 3F). Finally, we generalize the food pairing hypothesis by
exploring if ingredient pairs sharing more compounds are more likely
to be used in specific cuisines. The results largely correlate with our
earlier observations: in North American recipes, the more compounds
are shared by two ingredients, the more likely they appear in recipes.
By contrast, in East Asian cuisine the more flavor compounds two
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

ingredients share, the less likely they are used together (Fig. 3G and
3H; see SI for details and results on other cuisines).
What is the mechanism responsible for these differences? That is,
does Fig. 3C through H imply that all recipes aim to pair ingredients
together that share (North America) or do not share (East Asia)
flavor compounds, or could we identify some compounds responsible for the bulk of the observed effect? We therefore measured the
contribution xi (see Methods) of each ingredient to the shared compound effect in a given cuisine c, quantifying to what degree its
presence affects the magnitude of DNs.
In Fig. 3I,J we show as a scatter plot xi (horizontal axis) and the
frequency fi for each ingredient in North American and East Asian
cuisines. The vast majority of the ingredients lie on the xi 5 0 axis,
indicating that their contribution to DNs is negligible. Yet, we observe
a few frequently used outliers, which tend to be in the positive xi
region for North American cuisine, and lie predominantly in the
negative region for East Asian cuisine. This suggests that the food
pairing effect is due to a few outliers that are frequently used in a
particular cuisine, e.g. milk, butter, cocoa, vanilla, cream, and egg in
the North America, and beef, ginger, pork, cayenne, chicken, and
onion in East Asia. Support for the definitive role of these ingredients
is provided in Fig. 3K,L where we removed the ingredients in order
of their positive (or negative) contributions to DNs in the North
American (or East Asian) cuisine, finding that the z-score, which
measures the significance of the shared compound hypothesis, drops
below two after the removal of only 13 (5) ingredients from North
American (or East Asian) cuisine (see SI S2.2.2). Note, however, that
3

www.nature.com/scientificreports

Figure 3 | Testing the food pairing hypothesis. Schematic illustration of two ingredient pairs, the first sharing many more (A) and the second much fewer
(B) compounds than expected if the flavor compounds were distributed randomly. (C,D) To test the validity of the food pairing hypothesis, we construct
10,000 random recipes and calculate DNs. We find that ingredient pairs in North American cuisines tend to share more compounds while East Asian
cuisines tend to share fewer compounds than expected in a random recipe dataset. (E,F) The distributions P(Ns) for 10,000 randomized recipe datasets
compared with the real values for East Asian and North American cuisine. Both cuisines exhibit significant p-values, as estimated using a z-test. (G,H) We
enumerate every possible ingredient pair in each cuisine and show the fraction of pairs in recipes as a function of the number of shared compounds. To
reduce noise, we only used data points calculated from more than 5 pairs. The p-values are calculated using a t-test. North American cuisine is biased
towards pairs with more shared compounds while East Asian shows the opposite trend (see SI for details and results for other cuisines). Note that we used
the full network, not the backbone shown in Fig. 2 to obtain these results. (I,J) The contribution and frequency of use for each ingredient in North American
and East Asian cuisine. The size of the circles represents the relative prevalence pci . North American and East Asian cuisine shows the opposite trends. (K,L)
If we remove the highly contributing ingredients sequentially (from the largest contribution in North American cuisine and from the smallest contribution
in East Asian cuisine), the shared compounds effect quickly vanishes when we removed five (East Asian) to fifteen (North American) ingredients.

these ingredients play a disproportionate role in the cuisine under
consideration—for example, the 13 key ingredients contributing
to the shared compound effect in North American cuisine appear
in 74.4% of all recipes.
According to an empirical view known as ‘‘the flavor principle’’30,
the differences between regional cuisines can be reduced to a few key
ingredients with specific flavors: adding soy sauce to a dish almost
automatically gives it an oriental taste because Asians use soy sauce
widely in their food and other ethnic groups do not; by contrast
paprika, onion, and lard is a signature of Hungarian cuisine. Can
we systematically identify the ingredient combinations responsible
for the taste palette of a regional cuisine? To answer this question, we
measure the authenticity of each ingredient (pci ), ingredient pair (pcij ),
and ingredient triplet (pcijk ) (see Methods). In Fig. 4 we organize the
six most authentic single ingredients, ingredient pairs and triplets for
North American and East Asian cuisines in a flavor pyramid. The
rather different ingredient classes (as reflected by their color) in the
two pyramids capture the differences between the two cuisines:
North American food heavily relies on dairy products, eggs and
wheat; by contrast, East Asian cuisine is dominated by plant derivatives like soy sauce, sesame oil, and rice and ginger. Finally, the two
pyramids also illustrate the different affinities of the two regional
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

cuisines towards food pairs with shared compounds. The most
authentic ingredient pairs and triplets in the North American cuisine
share multiple flavor compounds, indicated by black links, but
such compound-sharing links are rare among the most authentic
combinations in East Asian cuisine.
The reliance of regional cuisines on a few authentic ingredient
combinations allows us to explore the ingredient-based relationship
(similarity or dissimilarity) between various regional cuisines. For
this we selected the six most authentic ingredients and ingredient
pairs in each regional cuisine (i.e. those shown in Fig. 4A,B), generating a diagram that illustrates the ingredients shared by various
cuisines, as well as singling out those that are unique to a particular
region (Fig. 4C). We once again find a close relationship between
North American and Western European cuisines and observe that
when it comes to its signature ingredient combinations Southern
European cuisine is much closer to Latin American than Western
European cuisine (Fig. 4C).

Discussion
Our work highlights the limitations of the recipe data sets currently
available, and more generally of the systematic analysis of food
4

www.nature.com/scientificreports

Figure 4 | Flavor principles. (A,B) Flavor pyramids for North American and East Asian cuisines. Each flavor pyramid shows the six most authentic
ingredients (i.e. those with the largest pci ), ingredient pairs (largest pcij ), and ingredient triplets (largest pcijk ). The size of the nodes reflects the abundance Pic
of the ingredient in the recipes of the particular cuisine. Each color represents the category of the ingredient (see Fig. 2 for the color) and link thickness
indicates the number of shared compounds. (C) The six most authentic ingredients and ingredient pairs used in specific regional cuisine. Node color
represents cuisine and the link weight reflects the relative prevalence pci of the ingredient pair.

preparation data. By comparing two editions of the same dataset with
significantly different coverage, we can show that our results are
robust against data incompleteness (see SI S1.1.2). Yet, better compound databases, mitigating the incompleteness and the potential
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

biases of the current data, could significantly improve our understanding of food. There is inherent ambiguity in the definition of a
particular regional or ethnic cuisine. However, as discussed in SI S1.2,
the correlation between different datasets, representing two distinct
5

www.nature.com/scientificreports
perspectives on food (American and Korean), indicates that humans
with different ethnic background have a rather consistent view on the
composition of various regional cuisines.
Recent work by Kinouchi et al.10 observed that the frequency-rank
plots of ingredients are invariant across four different cuisines,
exhibiting a shape that can be well described by a Zipf-Mandelbrot
curve. Based on this observation, they model the evolution of recipes by assuming a copy-mutate process, leading to a very similar
frequency-rank curve. The copy-mutate model provides an explanation for how an ingredient becomes a staple ingredient of a cuisine:
namely, having a high value or being a founder ingredient. The model
assigns each ingredient a random fitness value, which represents the
ingredient’s nutritional value, availability, flavor, etc. For example, it
has been suggested that some ingredient are selected because of their
antimicrobial properties6,7. The mutation phase of the model replaces
less fit ingredients with fitter ones. Meanwhile, the copy mechanism
keeps copying the founder ingredients—ingredients in the early
recipes—and makes them abundant in the recipes regardless of their
fitness value.
It is worthwhile to discuss the similarities and differences between
the quantities we measured and the concepts of fitness and founders.
First of all, prevalence (Pic ) and authenticity (pci ) are empirically
measured values while fitness is an intrinsic hidden variable.
Among the list of highly prevalent ingredients we indeed find old
ingredients—founders—that have been used in the same geographic
region for thousands of years. At the same time, there are relatively
new ingredients such as tomatoes, potatoes, and peppers that were
introduced to Europe and Asia just a few hundred years ago. These
new, but prevalent ingredients can be considered to have high fitness
values. If an ingredient has a high level of authenticity, then it is
prevalent in a cuisine while not so prevalent in all other cuisines.
Indeed, each culture has developed their own authentic ingredients. It may indicate that fitness can vary greatly across cuisines or
that the stochasticity of recipe evolution diverge the recipes in different regions into completely different sets. More historical investigation will help us to estimate the fitness of ingredients and assess
why we use the particular ingredients we currently do. The higher
order fitness value suggested in Kinouchi et al. is very close to our
concept of food pairing affinity.
Another difference in our results is the number of ingredients in
recipes. Kinouchi et al. reported that the average number of ingredients per recipe varies across different cookbooks. While we also
observed variation in the number of ingredients per recipe, the patterns we found were not consistent with those found by Kinouchi
et al. For instance, the French cookbook has more ingredients per
recipe than a Brazillian one, but in our dataset we find the opposite
result. We believe that a cookbook cannot represent a whole cuisine,
and that cookbooks with more sophisticated recipes will tend to have
more ingredients per recipe than cookbooks with everyday recipes.
As more complete datasets become available, sharper conclusions
can be drawn regarding the size variation between cuisines.
Our contribution in this context is a study of the role that flavour
compounds play in determining these fitness values. One possible
interpretation of our results is that shared flavor compounds represent one of several contributions to fitness value, and that, while
shared compounds clearly play a significant role in some cuisines,
other contributions may play a more dominant role in other cuisines.
The fact that recipes rely on ingredients not only for flavor but also to
provide the final textures and overall structure of a given dish provides support for the idea that fitness values depend on a multitude of
ingredient characteristics besides their flavor profile.
In summary, our network-based investigation identifies a series
of statistically significant patterns that characterize the way humans
choose the ingredients they combine in their food. These patterns
manifest themselves to varying degree in different geographic regions:
while North American and Western European dishes tend to combine
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

ingredients that share flavor compounds, East Asian cuisine avoids
them. More generally this work provides an example of how the datadriven network analysis methods that have transformed biology and
the social sciences in recent years can yield new insights in other areas,
such as food science.

Methods
Shared compounds. To test the hypothesis that the choice of ingredients is driven by
an appreciation for ingredient pairs that share flavor compounds (i.e. those linked in
Fig. 2), we measured the mean number of shared compounds in each recipe, Ns,
comparing it with Nsrand obtained for a randomly constructed reference recipe dataset.
For a recipe R that contains nR different ingredients, where each ingredient i has a set
of flavor compounds Ci, the mean number of shared compounds
X 

2
Ci \Cj 
Ns ðRÞ~
ð1Þ
nR ðnR {1Þ i,j[R,i=j
is zero if none of the ingredient pairs (i, j) in the recipe share any flavor compounds.
For example, the ‘mustard cream pan sauce’ recipe contains chicken broth, mustard,
and cream, none of which share any flavor compounds (Ns(R) 5 0) in our dataset.
Yet, Ns(R) can reach as high as 60 for ‘sweet and simple pork chops’, a recipe
containing apple, pork, and cheddar cheese (See Fig. 3A). To check whether recipes
with high Ns(R) are statistically preferred (implying the validity of the shared
compound hypothesis) in a cuisine c with Nc recipes, we calculate DNs ~Nsreal {Nsrand ,
where ‘real’ and ‘rand’ indicates real recipes and randomly constructed recipes
respectively and Ns 5 SR Ns(R)/Nc (see SI for details of the randomization process).
This random reference (null model) controls for the frequency of a particular
ingredient in a given regional cuisine, hence our results are not affected by historical,
geographical, and climate factors that determine ingredient availability (see SI S1.1.2).
Contribution. The contribution xi of each ingredient to the shared compound effect
in a given cuisine c, quantifying to what degree its presence affects the magnitude of
DNs, is defined by
0
1

!
P


X
X 

1
2
2fi
j[c fj Ci \Cj
Ci \Cj A{
P
, ð2Þ
xi @
N c h nR i
f
Nc R]i nR ðnR {1Þ j=iðj,i[RÞ
j[c j
where fi represents the ingredient i’s number of occurrence. An ingredient’s
contribution is positive (negative) if it increases (decreases) DNs.
Authenticity.
we define the prevalence Pic of each ingredient i in a cuisine c as

Pic ~nci Nc , where nci is the number of recipes that contain the particular ingredient i
in the cuisine and Ncis the
total number of recipes in the cuisine. The relative
0
prevalence pci ~Pic { Pic c0 =c measures the authenticity—the difference between the
prevalence of i in cuisine c and the average prevalence of i in all other cuisines. We can
also identify ingredient pairs or triplets that are overrepresented in a particular
D cuisine
E
0

relative to other cuisines by defining the relative pair prevalences pcij ~Pijc { Pijc 0
D 0E
.
. c =c
c
c
c
c
c
c
and triplet prevalences pcijk ~Pijk
{ Pijk
,
with
P
~n
and
P
~n
N
Nc .
c
ij
ij
ijk
ijk
0
c =c

1. Rozin, P. The selection of foods by rats, humans, and other animals. Advances in
the Study of Behavior 7, 21–76 (1976).
2. Pfaffman, C. Olfaction and taste V, chap. Phylogenetic origins of sweet sensitivity
(Academic Press, New York, 1975).
3. Garcia, J. & Hankins, W. G. Olfaction and taste V, chap. The evolution of bitter
and the acquisition of toxiphobia (Academic Press, New York, 1975).
4. Drewnowski, A. & Greenwood, M. R. C. Cream and sugar: human preferences for
highfat foods. Physiology & Behavior 30, 629–633 (1983).
5. Diamond, J. M. Guns, germs, and steel: The fates of human societies (W.W. Norton,
New York, 1997).
6. Billing, J. & Sherman, P. W. Antimicrobial functions of spices: why some like it
hot. The Quarterly Review of Biology 73, 3–49 (1998).
7. Sherman, P. W. & Hash, G. A. Why vegetable recipes are not very spicy. Evolution
and Human Behavior 22, 147–163 (2001).
8. Harris, M. Good to eat: riddles of food and culture (Waveland Press, 1998).
9. Counihan, C. & van Esterik, P. (eds.) Food and culture (Routledge, 2007).
10. Kinouchi, O., Diez-Garcia, R. W., Holanda, A. J., Zambianchi, P. & Roque, A. C.
The non-equilibrium nature of culinary evolution. New Journal of Physics 10,
073020 (2008).
11. Teng, C.-Y., Lin, Y.-R. & Adamic, L. A. Recipe recommendation using ingredient
networks (2011). ArXiv:1111.3919 [cs.SI].
12. This, H. Molecular gastronomy: exploring the science of flavor (Columbia
University Press, 2005).
13. Johnson, J. & Clydesdale, F. Perceived sweetness and redness in colored sucrose
solutions. Journal of Food Science 47, 747–752 (1982).
14. Shankaer, M. U. & Levitan, C. A. Grape expectations: the role of cognitive
influences in color-flavor interactions. Conscious Cogn. 19, 380–390 (2010).

6

www.nature.com/scientificreports
15. Zampini, M. & Spence, C. The role of auditory cues in modulating the perceived
crispness and staleness of potato chips. Journal of Sensory Studies 19, 347–363
(2005).
16. Breslin, P. A. S. & Beauchamp, G. K. Suppression of bitterness by sodium:
variation among bitter taste stimuli. Chem. Senses 20, 609–623 (1995).
17. Blumenthal, H. The big fat duck cookbook (Bloomsbury, London, 2008).
18. This, H. Molecular gastronomy, a scientific look at cooking. Accounts of Chemical
Research 42, 575–583 (2009).
19. McGee, H. On food and cooking: the science and lore of the kitchen (Scribner, 2004).
20. Burdock, G. A. Fenaroli’s handbook of flavor ingredients (CRC Press, 2004),
5th edn.
21. Newman, M. E. J., Barabási, A.-L. & Watts, D. J. The structure and dynamics of
networks (Princeton University Press, 2006).
22. Caldarelli, G. Scale-free networks: complex webs in nature and technology (Oxford
University Press, USA, 2007).
23. Dorogovtsev, S. N. & Mendes, J. F. F. Evolution of networks: from biological nets to
the internet and WWW (Oxford University Press, USA, 2003).
24. Albert, R. & Barabási, A.-L. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 74, 47 (2002).
25. Newman, M. E. J. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Review
45, 167–256 (2003).
26. Dorogovtsev, S. N., Goltsev, A. V. & Mendes, J. F. F. Critical phenomena in
complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics 80, 1275–61 (2008).
27. Barrat, A., Barthélemy, M., Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. The architecture
of complex weighted networks. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 111, 3747 (2004).
28. Serrano, M. A., Boguñá, M. & Vespignani, A. Extracting the multiscale backbone
of complex weighted networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
106, 6483–6488 (2009).

SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 1 : 196 | DOI: 10.1038/srep00196

29. Lee, S. H., Kim, P.-J., Ahn, Y.-Y. & Jeong, H. Googling social interactions:
web search engine based social network construction. PLoS One 5, e11233 (2010).
30. Rozin, E. The flavor-principle cookbook (Hawthorn Books, Book Club Ed. edition,
1973).

Acknowledgements
We thank M. I. Meirelles, S. Lehmann, D. Kudayarova, T. W. Lim, J. Baranyi, H. This for
discussions. This work was supported by the James S. McDonnell Foundation 21st Century
Initiative in Studying Complex Systems.

Author contributions
YYA, SEA, and ALB designed research and YYA, SEA, and JPB performed research. All
authors wrote and reviewed the manuscript.

Additional information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/
scientificreports
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
License: This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/
How to cite this article: Ahn, Y.-Y., Ahnert, S.E., Bagrow, J.P. & Barabási, A.-L. Flavor
network and the principles of food pairing. Sci. Rep. 1, 196; DOI:10.1038/srep00196 (2011).

7

