Idea Expander: Supporting Group Brainstorming with
Conversationally Triggered Visual Thinking Stimuli
Hao-Chuan Wang1, Dan Cosley1,2, Susan R. Fussell1,2
1
Information Science, 2Department of Communication
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA
[hw346, drc44, sfussell] @cornell.edu
ABSTRACT

improvisational jazz music performance in a band.

Creativity is central to much human problem solving and
innovation. Brainstorming processes attempt to leverage
group creativity, but group dynamics sometimes limit their
utility. We present IdeaExpander, a tool to support group
brainstorming by intelligently selecting pictorial stimuli
based on the group’s conversation The design is based on
theories of how perception, thinking, and communication
interact; a pilot study (N=16) suggests that it increases
individuals’ idea production and that people value it.

Group brainstorming that engages individuals to generate
ideas jointly has been one of the most popular teamwork
techniques for supporting creative idea generation. In
brainstorming groups, individuals focus on generating a
large amount of ideas without worrying too early in the
process about whether those ideas can be eventually used to
solve the given problems. The goal is to accumulate an
abundance of ideas that the group can sift through later.

Author Keywords

Creativity support tool, group brainstorming
ACM Classification Keywords

H5.3 Group and Organization Interface: Computersupported cooperative work
General Terms

Design, Experimentation, Human Factors, Performance
INTRODUCTION

Generating new ideas is at the core of many types of work.
Researchers think of new topics to study, new ways to
analyze data, and new experimental paradigms to advance
their work. Business teams consider new products, new
features for existing products, new ways of advertising and
better ways of producing their wares. Designers and
engineers seek innovative solutions for multiply constrained
design problems.
Identifying new ideas can be difficult due to individuals’
limited vision, knowledge, experience, motivation and time.
Collaborative teamwork that pools and integrates efforts
from multiple individuals is thus considered a useful way to
approach creativity. Some forms of creativity cannot even
happen without the involvement of group members, such as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
CSCW 2010, February 6–10, 2010, Savannah, Georgia, USA.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-795-0/10/02...$10.00.

From a system point of view, group brainstorming can be
viewed as a self-sustained social creativity system in which
the producer and consumer of ideas reside at the same
locus. Conversational interactions allow multiple thinkers
to exchange their ideas. Overhearing other people’s ideas
may stimulate individuals’ thinking [5] and consequently
make more ideas available as stimuli to the group members.
Successful group brainstorming is therefore an iterative
process that involves two main stages, idea exchange at the
social level and idea expansion at the cognitive level. Idea
expansion, generating new ideas based on existing ideas, is
a crucial stage that both determines the final product and
generates new stimuli that keep the brainstorming process
going. Group brainstorming is a fragile process, because
generating new, unconventional, or even deviant ideas can
be difficult, both in terms of cognitive and social
psychological processes [2][5].
In this paper, we propose to support group brainstorming
and enhance group creativity by shifting some agency of
idea exchange and idea expansion to computers, thereby
extending the creative power of brainstorming groups. We
describe IdeaEpxander, a system that creates an extra visual
communication channel that retrieves and shows pictorial
stimuli dynamically based on conversational content. Its
design is informed by cognitive theories that account for
how visual perception, communication, and thinking
interact in the context of group brainstorming. We evaluate
the system with a laboratory study. In a 14 minute
brainstorming session, IdeaExpander helped individuals
working in dyads each generate two more ideas (about
20%) than without IdeaExpander. This shows that
IdeaExpander is potentially helpful, especially as enhancing
ideation in dyads has been shown to be difficult [4].

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Cognitive and socio-cognitive processes mediated by IdeaExpander. (a) Cognitive processes of expanding ideas from
picture stimuli. (b) Socio-cognitive processes of exchanging and expanding ideas with conversationally retrieved pictures.

SOCIO-COGNITIVE PROCESSES IN BRAINSTORMING

Group brainstorming essentially involves idea generation at
the individual level and social interactions at the group
level. A complete picture of group brainstorming processes
would therefore require an understanding of cognitive
factors, social factors, and how social inputs may influence
individuals’ thinking processes and outcomes.
At the cognitive level, theories posit that human semantic
memory can be represented as a network structure in which
concepts are nodes with associative links with each other
[e.g.,,8]. A fundamental cognitive operation to generate
ideas is to retrieve concepts from associative memory.
Given the network structure of memory, retrieving one
concept may then make other interconnected concepts more
accessible and easier to retrieve. For example, thinking
about the concept “pet” may activate the concept “cat,”
which in turn might activate concepts like “cute” and
“playful.” In this way, activation of one concept spreads
through the memory network, with the degree of activation
attenuating with successive steps across nodes [8].
Spreading activation helps explain why brainstorming in
groups is useful. Overhearing another person’s idea helps
trigger the same concept in the overhearer’s associative
memory, thereby initiating the spreading activation process
in a subset of memory that has not yet been explored by the
individual, the cognitive stimulation effect [8]. In this paper,
we term the cognitive process of generating new ideas
based on earlier ideas as idea expansion.
However, despite the potential cognitive benefits, group
brainstorming often fails to actually help people generate
quantitatively more or qualitatively better ideas than what
they are able to do on their own [2]. There are negative
social side effects of working in groups, such as evaluation
apprehension (the fear of expressing ideas due to peer

evaluation pressure) and production blocking (taking turns
to speak up) [2]. These social side effects are primarily due
to the fact that people tend to view group brainstorming as a
social activity, not just an impersonal event for idea
exchange. As a result, social processes like impression
management and interpersonal communication play a
significant role in brainstorming groups. Because these
social barriers make it difficult to exchange ideas fully,
there may be fewer external stimuli available to stimulate
thinking and make idea expansion happen.
A three-step vicious circle arises from the interplay between
these social and cognitive processes:. (1) Social inhibition
of idea exchange: Individuals may not exchange all their
ideas due to peer evaluation pressure; (2) Poverty of
stimuli: Thus, fewer ideas are made available as stimuli for
others’ idea expansion; (3) Iterative convergence and
fixation: As group brainstorming progresses, the poverty of
stimuli leads to convergence of thoughts and may make it
even more difficult to think of new ideas.
Early research on brainstorming support mostly focused on
addressing the social inhibition issue by reducing peer
pressure as much as possible [4]. Limited attention has been
paid to ways of increasing cognitive stimulation.
THE IDEA EXPANDER MODEL

We take an innovative system approach to support idea
exchange and idea expansion by widening the bandwidth
between group members with a conversation-aware visual
communication channel. That is, IdeaExpander adds a
picture space that is shared by group members and is
sensitive to conversational content. An agent chooses
pictures related to ideas that have recently been discussed,
which may then stimulate the generation of new ideas.
Figure 1(a) shows the cognitive processes that bridge the
picture and the verbal communication space. We explain

Picture
Chooser

Picture
Retriever

Language
Processor

Figure 2. IdeaExpander screenshot and high-level
architecture. The system monitors the group conversation
(right) and selects pictures to display to the group (left).

the process by following Figure 1(a) from top to bottom,
starting at the picture space. We choose pictures as a
stimulus because cognitive theories and studies suggest that
human attention and perception may vary based on people’s
contexts, experiences, and culture. For example, individuals
with a collectivist cultural background tend to pay greater
attention to peripheral or background objects in a scene [1].
In Figure 1(a), when seeing the picture of a person throwing
a frisbee (the picture at the top-right), some people may
first notice the frisbee while others may notice subtleties
like the baseball caps or the crowd.
Second, in the internal perception space, individuals then
recognize and understand the visual elements they have
attended to. There could also be cognitive variability at this
level. People may interpret what they attend to differently
based on prior experiences and current framing; visual
illusions are often cited to demonstrate this variability [3].
Third, these perceptions may trigger concepts in the space
of associative memory, followed by spreading activation of
interconnected concepts. Again, people differ in how
concepts are organized and stored in their memory due to
experiences, socialization and education. In Figure 1(a),
thinking of “baseball cap” by viewing the picture at the top
left may lead the person to think of “sport” via the
associative link between concepts, even though the picture
at the top left has nothing to do with sports. (Others of us
may, unfortunately, think “bald”.)
At the bottom of the Figure 1(a), verbalization feeds into
the cognitive process as well. Words from the chat may
activate concepts; combining the spreading activation from
both pictures and words may lead to new ideas being
generated. This may in turn lead to the activation of new
concepts, the expression of new ideas, and the selection of
new pictures to continue the cycle of idea generation—
reversing the vicious circle described earlier.
Collaborative Idea Expansion

The power of the cognitive processes may be fully
unleashed when we connect multiple individuals with both
the picture and verbal communication spaces because this

leverages interpersonal variability. Figure 1(b) shows the
scenario of connecting two people in a social creativity
system. By using the concepts currently present in the chat
to select pictures, the agent can take advantage of the
differences in perception and associative memory between
people to find pictures that are both related to currently
activated concepts (as reflected by the words people type).
That may lead to divergent chains of spreading activation in
each participant, reducing the chance that the conversation
will become fixated and increasing the chance of new idea
generation. In short, the system helps people to see what
other people have said in new ways and to expand their
ideas using multiple pathways.
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION

We implemented a prototype of IdeaExpander in order to
evaluate the general approach of using pictures to stimulate
creativity. The implementation uses a combination of
machine learning, information retrieval, and wizard-of-oz
techniques. The wizard of oz aspects draw on a prior
experiment in which participants brainstormed in a
chatroom about the benefits and drawbacks of having an
extra eye or thumb [9].
Figure 2 shows both a screenshot and the agent’s high-level
architecture. Participants use a chat window on the right
side of the window, while the agent displays pictures it
chooses based on the conversation on the left. The
architecture has three main components: a language
processor, a picture retriever, and an image chooser. We
briefly discuss each in turn.
Language processor. IdeaExpander monitors the chat to
find keywords that it takes to be related to the set of
currently activated concepts among partners in the
conversation. Because brainstorming conversations include
both on-task and off-task remarks, IdeaExpander uses a
SVM classification model to determine whether a remark
contains an idea or not based on 5,391 labeled turns from
the experiment in [9], achieving a classification reliability
of Kappa .61 (80% accuracy).
Picture retriever. IdeaExpander uses keywords drawn from
remarks classified as containing ideas to retrieve candidate
pictures to show. The end goal is to use datasets such as
Google Images or Flickr that contain well-labeled images;
since thesedatabases are not yet well-labeled, we created
our own tailored for these tasks. In [9], analysis resulted in
a coding scheme containing 110 (thumb) and 118 (eye) idea
categories. We collected 60 pictures for each task from
Flickr; two people then coded each picture with the idea
categories that pertained to the picture (Krippendorff’s
alpha=.5). We then labeled each picture with the tags it
already had from Flickr and the words contained in the
codebook descriptions of the idea categories.
The agent matches conversational turns it classifies as
containing ideas against the keywords in the database using
TF-IDF in order to retrieve a relevant set of pictures. For

simplicity, it currently matches each turn individually.
Exploring the design space for how much and how strongly
to consider previous turns would be interesting future work.
Picture chooser. The agent then attempts to choose pictures
that will optimize cognitive stimulation. In the general case,
we think this would involve choosing pictures associated
with concepts that are near both participants’ currently
activated concepts and that lead to new ideas. This is nontrivial in general (see [7]); here, we compute a utility score
that prefers pictures that may stimulate many ideas and
ideas that are less likely to be generated.
We used the dataset from [9] to estimate the probability that
a brainstorming group would generate each idea category,
and weighed each idea i as log(1/probability of idea i). The
utility score for a picture is the sum of weighted scores of
the ideas coded as pertaining to it. The agent selects the
picture from the relevant set with the highest utility score
that has not yet been shown and updates the picture space
with a new picture every three seconds.
Evaluation

We recruited 16 participants, forming eight brainstorming
pairs. Each pair performed both the thumb and eye tasks,
using IdeaExpander for one task and a standard chatroom
for the other, generating a total of 32 observations. The
order of tasks and tool use was counterbalanced. Pairs
worked 14 minutes for each task. Residual analysis showed
that one of the 32 observations was an outlier, so it is not
included in the statistics below.
We first compared ideation productivity across conditions.
Two people independently coded the chat using the coding
scheme from the prior experiment (Kappa=.66). Categories
were only counted as unique ideas once per group. A mixed
model ANOVA that accounts for the dependency between
group members showed that even with the small sample
size, individuals appear to generate more ideas when
working with IdeaExpander (14.3) than without (12.0)
(F[1,13]=2.88, p≤0.1). That is, IdeaExpander helped people
think of 2.3 more ideas in a short brainstorming session.
Quantity may breed also quality and originality of ideas.
People generated more “rare” ideas (those with rates of
occurrence lower than 1%) with IdeaExpander (4.3) than
without it (3.5) (F[1,13]=2.36, p≤0.1).
We also looked at people’s attitudes toward IdeaExpander.
On a post-experiment survey, 13 of 16 participants said the
pictures were helpful (6) or sometimes helpful (7). Some
informally praised the system; one volunteered that the
pictures were helpful for him to think smoothly; another
was excited about IdeaExpander’s interaction model.
CONCLUSION

The evaluation demonstrates the value of IdeaExpander as a
tool to support group brainstorming. IdeaExpander itself is

a proof-of-concept. A fully functional system would require
work in a number of areas, including developing effective
representations of active concepts in the group and in each
member, creating larger databases of labeled picture
information, and creating algorithms that more effectively
use associative networks of concepts, perhaps drawing on
ideas from work around concept maps [6] or general tools
for discovering associations between ideas (e.g., [7]).
IdeaExpander could also use different media (sounds,
videos, text clips), or allow participants to contribute
keywords directly to the agent as a way of sidestepping
social inhibitions about expressing ideas in the conversation
itself. Our results suggest it is worth exploring these
questions in support of group creativity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Rebecca Flewelling, Meaghan Frank and Leslie
Setlock for their assistance. The material is based on work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants
No. IIS-0803482, IIS-0325047 and IIS-0845351.
REFERENCES

1. Chua, H. F., Boland, J. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (2005).
Cultural variation in eye movements during scene
perception. Proc. Nat’l Acad. Sci., 102, 12629- 12633.
2. Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: toward the solution of a riddle. J.
Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 497-509.
3. Edelman, S. (2008). Computing the Mind: How the
Mind Really Works. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
4. Gallupe, R. B., Dennis, A. R., Cooper, W. H., Valacich,
J. S., Bastianutti, L. M., & Nunamaker, J. F. (1992).
Electornic brainstorming and group size. The Academy
of Management Journal, 35, 350-369.
5. Nijstad, B. A., & Stroebe, W. (2006). How the group
affects the mind: a cognitive model of idea generation in
groups. Pers. and Social Psych. Review, 10, 186-213.
6. Novak, J. D. (1998). Learning, creating, and using
knowledge: Concept maps as facilitative tools in schools
and corporations. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
7. Maguitman, A., Leake, D., & Reichherzer, T. (2005).
Suggesting novel but related topics: towards contextbased support for knowledge model extension. Proc. of
IUI 2005.
8. Raaijmakers, J.G.W., & Shiffrin, R.M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psych. Review, 88(2), 93-134.
9. Wang, H-C. , Fussell, S. R., & Setlock, L. D. (2009).
Cultural difference and adaptation of communication
styles in computer-mediated group brainstorming.
Proceedings of CHI 2009.

