3D Printed Interactive Speakers
Yoshio Ishiguro
Disney Research Pittsburgh,
4720 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
yoshio.ishiguro@disneyresearch.com

Ivan Poupyrev *
Disney Research Pittsburgh,
4720 Forbes Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
ivan.poupyrev@disneyresearch.com

Figure 1. 3D printed speakers: (a) Speaker is embedded into toy (b) The entire 3D printed object is a speaker,
(c) Printed speakers can have arbitrary geometries
ABSTRACT

We propose technology for designing and manufacturing
interactive 3D printed speakers. With the proposed technology, sound reproduction can easily be integrated into various objects at the design stage and little assembly is required. The speaker can take the shape of anything from an
abstract spiral to a rubber duck, opening new opportunities
in product design. Furthermore, both audible sound and
inaudible ultrasound can be produced with the same design,
allowing for identifying and tracking 3D printed objects in
space using common integrated microphones. The design of
3D printed speakers is based on electrostatic loudspeaker
technology first explored in the early 1930s but not broadly
applied until now. These speakers are simpler than common
electromagnetic speakers, while allowing for sound reproduction at 60 dB levels with arbitrary directivity ranging
from focused to omnidirectional. Our research of 3D printed
speakers contributes to the growing body of work exploring
functional 3D printing in interactive applications.
Author Keywords

3D printing; speakers; audio; ultrasonic; tracking; rapid
prototyping; tangible; additive manufacturing
ACM Classification

H.5.2. [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces---Auditory feedback, Haptic I/O.
* Currently at Google’s Motorola ATAP division
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2014, April 26 - May 01 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2473-1/14/04$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557046

INTRODUCTION

3D printing technology has expanded from being a tool for
rapid prototyping of shapes to printing functional objects,
including everything from providing a simple enclosure for
a printed circuit board to replacing a broken airplane part
[4]. Furthermore, with the development of sophisticated
multi-material 3D printers [18,27] it is becoming possible to
take the next step and fabricate not only passive mechanical
components, but functional electromechanical devices as
well. Here the shape and functionality are designed simultaneously and then fabricated in one step [18]. Although still
in the early stages, recent research has demonstrated how
functional Zn-air batteries, organic-polymer transistors and
electromechanical relays can be fabricated using additive
3D fabrication techniques [17]. With the continued development of novel materials and 3D printing technologies
[26], we believe that the capability to 3D print functional
electrical circuits and conductive electrode surfaces as an
integral part of a 3D printed object is within reach.
The importance of 3D printing techniques has been recognized in the human-computer interaction (HCI) community.
There is a rapidly growing body of work that explores applications of this emerging fabrication technology, including the possibility of creating novel 3D printed interface
controllers [9,23,28], of developing interactive tools for the
design and rapid fabrication of interactive systems
[13,20,22] and many others [2,5,14,28].
We, in particular, are inspired by the vision of a future
where interactive devices are not assembled from massproduced components, but rather designed and 3D printed
on-demand locally as individual objects. The establishment
of such a manufacturing technology would have a profound
and lasting impact on the way future interfaces and interactive devices are designed and developed. It would introduce
an unprecedented degree of personalization and customization and a much higher degree of interface components in-

tegration, which would allow for nearly arbitrary product
geometries. Furthermore, the physical interfaces can be
designed and re-designed in an ad-hoc manner by the end
user in a way that may terrify professional product and interaction designers, but that could unleash unprecedented
freedom and creativity within the broader user community.
As noted in [28] the ability to “… digitally fabricate high
fidelity, highly customized, ‘ready-to-go’ devices will be a
powerful enabling technology for HCI research.”
In this paper we contribute to this vision by presenting the
design, fabrication principles, experimental evaluation and
some potential applications of an interactive 3D printed
loudspeaker. The production of the 3D printed speaker is
based on principles of electrostatic sound reproduction
(ESR) which were investigated in depth as early as the
1930s [8] but have not been broadly used before today except in high performance audio systems [e.g. 29]. However,
in the course of our research we discovered that there is a
natural fit between 3D printing technology and ESR speaker
design. Because of the simplicity of ESR, it allows us to
design and fabricate speakers that are seamlessly integrated
into physical objects of arbitrary geometries, including
spherical and omnidirectional shapes. Furthermore, 3D
printed speakers can produce both audible and ultrasound
frequencies and, therefore, can provide tracking and object
identification in addition to sound reproduction. Experimental evaluation demonstrates that our technology produces high quality sound at 60 dB levels. Figure 1 presents 3D
speakers that we have designed and manufactured.
The current design and implementation of 3D printed
speakers still requires manual steps because we are unable
to access multi-material printers that are capable of printing
with 3D print conductive polymers and inks [26]. Therefore, all conductive layers in our prototypes were painted
using commodity conductive spray paints. However, the
fundamental principles of the design and application of 3D
printed speakers outlined in this paper are general and are
not contingent on the limitations of technology available
today. In the near future 3D printers capable of printing
with conductive materials will become commonplace, and
the vision of printing functional speakers embedded into
objects with no human involvement will become the reality.
This paper’s contributions are as follows:
1) We introduce the concept and implementation of 3D
printed speakers, including the principles of their operation,
as well as details of their design and fabrication;
2) We report their properties as well as results of our experimental evaluation of 3D printed speakers; and
3) We describe applications, advantages and limitations of
3D printed speaker technology, including their interactive
applications, e.g., ultrasound tracking and identification.
RELATED WORK

In the last two decades there has been rapid growth in the
application of print-based techniques in device manufacturing, including printing circuits using electro-conductive

inks, printing transistors, microprocessors and even displays
[3,6,10,16]. At the same time, free-form 3D printing technology based on additive fabrication techniques has been
used to create both passive objects as well as integrated
functional devices, such as actuators, relays, batteries and
other items [17].
Recently, growing efforts have been focused on developing
new materials and processes to 3D print integrated objects
where enclosures, shapes, and functional elements (such as
electronics, power, storage and optics) are all printed in one
step. An example of such an effort is Printed Optics [28]
that uses the Objet Eden260V multi-material printer to integrate custom optical elements, such as light pipe bundles,
into passive 3D printed shapes. When combined with some
minimal electrical components, it allows for the design of
novel interactive display and input devices that are not feasible using any other current fabrication technology.
We are not aware of any previous attempt to investigate the
fabrication of 3D printed speakers. A loudspeaker is one of
the most fundamental output devices in interactive systems.
It is a transducer that converts an input electrical signal into
an audible acoustic signal. The most common speakers are
based on electromagnetic and piezoelectric operational
principles that have important limitations.
Electromagnetic speakers include a voice coil and a magnet, and the sound is generated by the vibration of a paper
cone induced by moving the magnet. Electromagnetic
speakers are relatively large and consist of multiple materials and moving parts. The shape of the electromagnetic
speaker is usually limited to a classic cone or one of its variations. Although mass-produced speakers are relatively
cheap, designing and producing custom speakers is expensive and requires a significant engineering effort. It would
be difficult, if not impossible, to 3D print a functional electromagnetic speaker of an arbitrary shape.
Piezoelectric speakers consist of two electrodes with a thin
piezoelectric element, e.g., lead zirconate titanate (PZT),
sandwiched in between. As a signal is applied to the electrodes the piezoelectric element bends, producing an audible vibration. Although piezoelectric speakers are simple
and inexpensive, they are produced by baking ceramic paste
at very high temperatures. Therefore, it is difficult and expensive to produce them in anything other than a flat shape,
particularly in small quantities. Increasing the size of the
piezoelectric elements is particularly challenging because
their audio response rapidly decreases with increased size
and thickness. Piezoelectric speakers are also capable of
creating ultrasonic sound sources and they are commonly
used in designing various sensors.
Classic speaker technologies, by the very nature of sound
production, place significant constraints on their form factors, thus limiting their application. It is relatively difficult
and expensive, for example, to create omnidirectional
speakers that produce sound equally in all directions. There
have been many efforts to overcome the form factor limitations and produce alternative speaker designs. Film speak-

ers, for example, can be very thin, flexible and transparent.
They are usually based on vibrating thin sheets of film with
PZT or electroactive polymer actuators [25]. Stretchable
speakers use silicon substrates and ionic conductors to produce audible sound [11]. Cylindrical speakers create omnidirectional sound by using PZT tubes [12] or arrays of
transducers placed on cylindrical surfaces [1,24].
Currently one of the least commonly used techniques for
sound production is electrostatic loudspeaker (ESL) technology which was intensively investigated in the early
1930s through 1950s [8,15,19]. ESL technology had certain limitations that inhibited its wider adoption, and we
discuss them in the next section. Nevertheless, ESL technology has very attractive properties for 3D printing: it is
very simple, it has almost no moving parts, and it can be
made out of inexpensive common materials. ESL does not
require complex assembly or involved production processes; in fact, speakers can easily be made at home by hand
and can take various geometrical shapes. Electrostatic
sound production forms the basic foundation of the 3D
printed speaker technology we propose in this paper.
3D PRINTED SPEAKERS

This section presents the design of 3D printed free-form
speakers based on electrostatic sound reproduction principles (ESR). It discusses the principles of their operation and
design and then outlines the basic categories of 3D printed
speakers investigated in this paper. We discuss the details
of speaker fabrication techniques, their properties, and report on their experimental evaluation.
Electrostatic Sound Reproduction

The basic principles of electrostatic sound reproduction are
simple and were explored in depth in the 1930s. A thin conductive diaphragm and an electrode plate are separated by
insulating material, e.g., air, with the dielectric permittivity
ε (Figure 2a). The audio signal is amplified to ~1000 V and
applied to the electrode, charging it relative to the ground
level that is connected to the diaphragm. As the electrode is
charging, an electrostatic attraction force is developed between the electrode and diaphragm. According to Columb’s
Law this attractive force can be calculated as follows:

 q q ε SV 2
,
F= 1 2 =
(1)
2ε S 2d 2
where ε is permittivity, S is electrode surface size, d is distance and V is a potential difference between the electrode

and the diaphragm [8,15]. This electrostatic force would
deform or displace the diaphragm by Δx (Figure 2a) and, as
an alternating audio signal is provided, the displaced air
would create an audible signal. Thus, the diaphragm actuated with electrostatic force would create a speaker.
The sound quality of an ESR speaker depends on several
factors. According to Equation 1, a larger surface, a higher
insulator permittivity and a smaller distance between plates
creates a stronger force, increasing both Δx and sound pressure levels. We cannot increase the size of the electrode and
diaphragm indefinitely: a lighter diaphragm produces better
speaker response. Therefore, a lighter speaker would by
louder then a larger ESR device with a heavy diaphragm.
The ESR speaker forms a capacitor and, therefore, another
key property is the electrical time constant τ, which defines
how fast the induced charge builds on the capacitor plates:
ε SR
τ =C⋅R =
,
(2)
d
where R is the input impedance of the speaker. A larger τ
would degrade speaker response at higher frequencies. The
design of the speaker, therefore, is a question of tradeoffs
between loudness and the frequency response.
It has been demonstrated that ESR speakers allow for high
quality sound reproduction, outperforming traditional electromagnetic speakers in both high and medium sound frequency ranges [15]. Nevertheless, they have a number of
limitations that inhibite their broad application. The sound
reproduction industry was established in the 1930s, and
high voltage amplification was difficult before the invention
of the transistor. Even today, the selection of high-voltage
audio drivers is very limited. Furthermore, achieving high
sound volume in a living room, for example, depends on
large diaphragms (~0.5m2) with a uniform surface tension.
This requires relatively high precision manufacturing, limiting ESL applications to the HiFi audio niche. These limitations, however, become significantly less crucial when ESR
technology is used for low cost, low sound volume speakers
embedded in toys and embodied interaction devices.
In the ESR speakers reported here we connect the ground to
the diaphragm and the audio signal to the electrode (Figure
2b right). This is contrary to the ESR speaker design proposed previously [8,15], where the signal was connected to
the diaphragm or a two-electrode configuration was used
(Figure 2b left and middle). In designing home audio
speakers the choice is irrelevant. However, it becomes important in 3D printed speakers embedded in toys and objects
that can be touched by the user. The grounded diaphragm
protects the user touching the speaker from the high-voltage
audio source, making it safe to handle and manipulate the
object with embedded speakers. This becomes particularly
important in the interactive applications that we describe
later in the paper.
Designing 3D Printed Speakers

Figure 2. a) Construction of electrostatic speaker.
b) Electrostatic speaker configurations

The overall design of 3D printed speakers is presented in
Figure 3 using the example of a toy character with an inte-



    


 

"

!
!


 

!
 


"
 

 

Figure 3. 3D printed speaker system diagram, here the speaker is integrated into the toy character

grated speaker. The body of the toy is 3D printed using currently available 3D printing technology. In our case, we
used an Objet Eden260V 3D printer with triple material
printing head. However, it is not capable of printing conductive materials, and thus was supplemented with a nickelbased conductive spray paint (MG Chemicals Super
Shield™ Nickel conductive coating). Painting conductive
layers is a simple procedure; it will become unnecessary
when printing heads capable of printing conductive materials become available. In the future the painting process will
be eliminated altogether.
The conductive layer painted on the body of the toy becomes an inner electrode layer where the audio signal in
injected (Figure 3). The sound-producing diaphragm is then
3D printed and painted with conductive paint as well. In
addition, it is also coated with a silicone-based coating
spray (TechSpray® 2102-12S) that insulates the electrode
and sound-making diaphragm. The diaphragm is next inserted into the toy and held in place using the 3D-printed
connector ring. The diaphragm and painted electrode are
finally connected to both the ground and audio outputs of
the custom-designed high-voltage audio driver.
The audio driver for printed speakers amplifies the input
audio signal from nominal amplitude (~1.0 V peak-to-peak)
to 1000 V peak-to-peak signal by using a high-voltage transistor amplification circuit. A miniature step-up converter
(EMCO QH10-5) boosts voltage from 5 V DC to 1000 V
DC, which is used as a voltage source for the transistor amplifier. The output current of the voltage converter and,
therefore, the audio driver is ~1.25 mA. The entire driver
runs at 5 V DC and consumes 250 mA maximum current.

3D Printed Speakers Design Space

3D printed speakers can take a variety of forms and shapes
leading to many unique applications. Figure 4 explores
some of the forms that become possible with printed speaker technology. It is obvious that we can create traditional
flat planer speakers (Figure 4, top) that are common today
and that have been explored before. Therefore, we do not
explore this category of speaker in this paper.
At the next level of complexity speakers can take a variety
of basic 3D geometrical shapes including traditional coneshaped speakers, cylindrical, spherical and others (Figure 4,
middle). All these shapes produce sound in all directions
around the speaker, i.e., omnidirectional sound production.
Note that designing 3D geometrical speakers using traditional speaker technologies is challenging. Using our 3D
printed speaker approach, however, designing various geometrical speakers is a relatively trivial problem. We will
discuss it later in the paper.
The most challenging and important aspect of 3D printed
speakers is that they can be integrated into objects of arbitrary shapes, becoming an unobtrusive and invisible part of
their design (Figure 4, bottom). 3D printed speaker technology provides an alternative to traditional techniques of integrating loudspeaker functionality into objects and devices.

Air electrical breakdown can occur between high-voltage
traces [21]. Therefore, it is important that an appropriate
distance (> 1 mm) is maintained between all high-voltage
traces and connectors on the controller board. In addition,
silicone-based insulator spray can be used to improve the
insulation between the contacts.
The implemented printed speaker system is presented in
Figure 3 on the right. It can operate using either a standard
Li-Ion battery or a USB connection. It accepts any standard
audio source, such as a mobile phone.

Figure 4. 3D printed speakers design space

Here speakers take arbitrary shapes making them an integral
part of the object. In some cases only parts of an object may
have speaker functionality and in other cases the entire body
of the object generates sound.
Diaphragm Design for 3D Printed Speakers

The key factor influencing the sound quality of printed
speakers is the design of the diaphragm. Figure 5 presents
the results of the displacement measurements for two 3D
printed diaphragms with the thicknesses of 1.0 mm and 0.5
mm and weighing 5.94 g and 3.65 g, respectively, driven by
a 100 Hz sinusoid signal. The Keyence® LK-H057 laser
displacement sensor is used to measure the movement of the
diaphragm at a 20 kHz sampling rate with 0.025 μm accuracy. In addition to displacement, an Extech® 407730 Sound
Level Meter (SLM) is used to measure sound pressure levels (SPL) 30 cm away from the speaker.
The experiments demonstrate that a) printed speakers work
as designed, and b) lighter and thinner diaphragms produce
significantly larger displacement and therefore louder
sound. In fact, the displacement nearly doubles when we
decrease the thickness of the diaphragm by half. The emitted speaker energy increases with the increase of the displacement, which is supported by the measurements that
resulted in 54.8 dBSPL and 53.2 dBSPL for 0.5 mm and 1.0
mm diaphragms using 2 kHz input signal.
The latter observation, while seeming straightforward, is not
obvious. As diaphragms become thinner, they also become
much more flexible. Initially it was not clear to us that thinner, yet more flexible, diaphragms would outperform slightly thicker and stiffer ones. The experiments demonstrate
that the stiffness of a diaphragm is not as important as its
thickness and weight. This finding allows us to significantly
expand the range of materials and processes that may be
used to create effective diaphragms for 3D printed speakers.
Directionality and Geometry of 3D Printed Speakers

Printed speakers allow for transforming the surface of an
object into a sound producing device. Among other things,
this allows us to design speakers that have either highly
directive or, adversely, omnidirectional sound. This is a
unique and exciting property of ESR speaker technology.
Indeed, designing speakers that are either highly directive or
omnidirectional is a challenging problem. It usually requires
designing speaker arrays where each speaker has to be individually controlled and calibrated, both of which are expen-

sive and labor intensive. In the case of 3D printed speakers,
the entire surface of an object contributes to sound production. The sound direction is normal to the diaphragm geometry [25]. Therefore, the directionality of sound can be partially controlled by the object’s surface geometry.
To investigate this observation, four speaker shapes are
designed, including a classic speaker cone, a half cylinder, a
full cylinder and a slit speaker where the vibrating diaphragm is inside (Figure 6). The diaphragm area for all
speakers is kept constant at 5625 mm2. Common aluminum
metallized polyester film is used for diaphragms. Metalized
polyester offers an inexpensive and easy to use alternative
to 3D printed diaphragms for simple geometrical shapes: it
is light, durable, thin (~0.127 mm) and easily accessible.
We evaluated the directionality of each printed speaker using input signal frequencies at 2 kHz and 10 kHz. A printed
speaker is placed on a laser-cut experimental base plate with
engraved registration marks for sound level meter (SLM)
locations. We move the SLM by hand between measurements. The duration of measurements are 5 sec for each
SLM location. Because the sound pressure produced by
small printed speakers is relatively low, the measurement
volume is small (~1m3). Therefore, we are able to isolate
the experimental setup from the environment noise by carefully shielding the measurement apparatus with accessible
soundproof materials.
Figure 6 shows the results of the SPL measurements at different angles for each of the 3D printed speakers. The graph
is normalized in relation to the sound pressure levels at 0
degrees and plotted with a 22.5 degree interval. The results
of the measurement demonstrate that sound directionality is
indeed defined by the surface geometry of the printed
speaker. Each point of the diaphragm emits sound in an
approximately normal direction, as is expected. The directionality is stronger at higher frequencies, which is also expected. We are particularly impressed with 3D printed cylindrical speakers: the sound distribution is nearly perfectly
uniform (Figure 6d), making a relatively high quality yet
very inexpensive omnidirectional speaker.
The slit speaker allows for the production of directional
sound and is presented on Figure 7. Note that we were not
able to measure sound pressure levels in 90o – 270o diapason at 10 kHz because the sound pressure levels were below
the SPL sensitivity thresholds. A 3D printed slit speaker
provides a very useful configuration where the speaker has
to be placed inside of the object, e.g., inside of a toy character with a mouth opening. This creates the impression of
sound coming directly from the character’s mouth – increasing both realism and engagement. Furthermore, the slit
design protects the user from the electrical circuitry.
Electrode Arrays in Printed Speakers

Figure 5. Displacements of 3D printed diaphragms.

3D printed speakers can be designed with any electrode
configuration and number of electrodes. In the case of electrode arrays, each electrode acts as an independent 3D
printed speaker, even though all of them share a single diaphragm.

Figure 6. Directionality and geometry of 3D printed speakers.

To test 3D printed electrode arrays we measured sound
pressure level distributions for a half cylindrical speaker
with painted electrodes at 20o – 90o, 30o – 330o and 340o –
270o degrees (Figure 8). A single metalized polyester diaphragm is used as in previous experiments (Figure 6b). The
same measurement setup is used in the directionality measurements reported above.
Figure 8 shows the measurement results using a 2 kHz input
signal for each electrode. We can clearly observe that each
painted electrode produces directive sound output in its respective direction. This demonstrates the versatility of
printed speaker technology: A single object can have multiple electrodes sharing the same diaphragm and yet acting as
individual speakers, with individual and directive sound
output. Location-based audio displays, both on a small-

Figure 7. The design of a slit printed speaker

Figure 8. Multi-electrode 3D printed speakers

object scale and on the scale of entire environments, can be
easily created using 3D printed speakers.
Integrating 3D Printed Speakers into Objects

The vision behind 3D printed speakers is the integration of
loudspeaker functionality into objects at the design stage.
Although our current prototypes presently require a certain
amount of hand assembly, in the future we envision designers picking and dropping speakers into objects and devices
as one of the elements of their CAD programs [28]. In this
section we investigate possible means for integrating loudspeaker functionality into objects.
The most straightforward way to integrate speaker functionality into an object is to simply place one of the basic geometrical speakers (Figure 4) into the appropriate place in the
object. As an example of this approach we created a toy
bear with a speaker embedded within the head (Figure 1, 3).
Such integration is trivial and any of the geometric speaker
shapes can be used. The disadvantage of this approach is
that the speaker is visible and, although the design process
is simplified, from the user’s perspective there is no difference between the printed speaker and a traditional speaker.
An alternative approach to embedding the speaker is to enhance the actual body of the object with loudspeaker functionality: the entire object’s surface or any part of it would
become the speaker, seamless and invisible to the user. In
the simplest approach, only the parts of the object surface
that can be augmented with 3D printed diaphragms would
be, turning the object into the speaker. Figure 9 demonstrates a Spiral Speaker. The 3D printed diaphragm is
shown on the left and an assembled speaker is shown on the
right. The diaphragm is attached on the speaker body using
a soft silicon compound. Similarly, any other object that has
any number of flat faces can be easily turned into a speaker.
Thus, we can imagine toys, decorations, household items
and other objects augmented with loudspeaker functionality.
Another approach to augment objects with loudspeaker
functionality is to turn the entire body of the object into a

uses film coatings and molds to create diaphragms that are
~0.14 mm thin and weigh 1.1 g. Figure 12 demonstrates the
process. First, negative molds are 3D printed using the same
CAD model as for the object (Figure 11). Then both the
mold and the object are sprayed with nickel-based conductive paint. The mold is then coated with polyethylene coating spray (3M Paint Defender™ Spray Film), forming a
thin soft film bonded to the conductive paint (Figure 12c).
Figure 9. 3D printed Spiral Speaker.

The polyethylene coating spray is a poor insulator inappropriate for high-voltage applications. Therefore, the object
body is then coated with a silicone-based insulation spray
over the nickel-based paint layer. We fast dry the molds in
an oven and carefully remove the formed film from the
mold (Figure 12d). The resulting diaphragm is strong, conductive, thin, and mirrors the object shape. It is used to cover the entire body of the object, turning it into a speaker.
INTERACTIVE USES OF 3D PRINTED SPEAKERS

Figure 10. 3D printed Duck Speaker.

The basic purpose of 3D printed speakers is to produce an
effective sound display. In addition, however, 3D printed
speakers also allow for additional interactive functionality
that we discuss in this section.
Ultrasonic Tracking and Identification

Figure 13 demonstrates the frequency response of coneshaped 3D printed speakers. It shows that they can effectively reproduce sound over 20 kHz, i.e., in ultrasonic frequencies. Thus, objects enhanced with 3D printed speakers
can both output audible sound and produce signals at ultrasonic frequencies that can be used for lightweight data
transmission and object tracking.
Figure 11. Thin film diaphragm fabrication.

speaker by covering the object with the diaphragm. Figure
10 demonstrates a Duck Speaker where the entire 3D printed duck toy is wrapped in a compliant diaphragm, creating
one single sound-emitting surface.
The challenge in designing full body object speakers is creating a diaphragm that is thin, robust and covers the entire
body of the object. The experimental evaluation reported
earlier in the paper has demonstrated that a thinner and softer diaphragm produces louder sound pressure levels. However, the minimum thickness of a 3D printed diaphragm
using our Objet printer is limited to ~0.3 mm, resulting in a
relatively heavy diaphragm, reducing sound levels.
In order to create thin, reliable, full-body object compliant
diaphragms we developed a new fabrication procedure that

To make a compact audio driver we use a small highvoltage regulator with current-limited output. Therefore,
there is an amplitude drop at ultrasonic frequencies (Figure
13). This is because, with the increase of signal frequency,
the impedance drops and the regulator cannot support the
subsequent current increase. A larger 3W high-voltage
power supply allows for a nearly flat response. However,
we have found that for short-range tracking and data transmission the ultrasound signal produced with printed speakers is efficient even with lower signal amplitude.
We explored two interactive applications of printed speakers that are enabled by their ultrasonic capabilities. These
consist of lightweight character identification in a storytelling application and distance tracking between a computer
and a 3D printed character. In both applications no additional equipment has to be provided: we use a standard microphone embedded in the laptop computer.

Figure 12. Fabrication process of thin-film diaphragms.

percent at each distance, respectively. It also means that we
can achieve 100 percent accuracy when all 20 measurements are used for object identification. The experiments
demonstrate that at close distances (~1m) the object identification is effective and can be significantly improved by
introducing data redundancy and error correction codes.
The error rate is also affected by the speaker orientation and
can be minimized by using an omnidirectional design.
Distance tracking
Figure 13. The frequency response of printed speakers.

Figure 14. Character identification.

Figure 15. Distance tracking.

The 3D printed bear toy is used to implement and evaluate
ultrasonic distance tracking (Figure 15). The bear is connected to the computer, which outputs a 20KHz ultrasonic
impulse on the embedded 3D printed speaker. The application software detects the impulse by using a built-in microphone and Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), then
measures the time difference between the initial and returned impulses and calculates the distance. The resulting
distance can then be used for 3D interaction and gesture
recognition, games and storytelling applications.
Figure 16b presents the results of preliminary distance error
measurements for the bear-shaped speaker at various distances from the computer microphone. The tracking impulse signal is outputted 30 times at each position. The root
mean square error of tracking is 3.83 cm and standard deviation is 4.04. The tracking accuracy is sufficient for most of
the envisioned interactive applications. We believe that,
with better data processing and low-level optimization of
the internal audio processing, the tracking error can be reduced to a minimum. Furthermore, with the improved performance more detailed and rich gesture interaction can
potentially be implemented, for example, by using the Doppler effect [7]. A stereo microphone or a microphone array
would allow for the tracking of the 3D position of the character with the embedded 3D printed speaker. We are electing to leave this research for future work.
Touchable and Tactile Feedback

Figure 16. a) Identification error
b) Distance measurement error
Character identification

The ultrasound Frequency Shift Keying (FSK) modulation
is used to create unique object IDs for two 3D printed characters: a duck and a bear. The FSK ID is an 8-bit long
ASCII code and has no parity bits. When the user brings
characters within ~1m of the computer microphone, the
application software detects a modulated ultrasound signal,
decodes the character ID and presents feedback by animating the appropriate cartoon character on the screen (Figure
14). Note that no physical connection between the computer
and character is required, i.e., character identification can be
completely ad hoc.
Figure 16a presents the results of identification error measurements for the bear-shaped speaker at 30, 50, 80 and 110
cm distance of the computer microphone. The character ID
is sent 20 times with a 500ms interval for each test distance.
The measured error rate is approximately 0, 15, 30, and 45

A 3D printed speaker can be touched and held by the users
and still function effectively as a speaker. In ESR speakers
the entire thin, elastic diaphragm participates in creating
sound and, therefore, even when users touch and hold some
part of the diaphragm, the rest of it still functions as a
speaker (see Figure 17).
We measure the effect of touching and holding a 3D printed
cone speaker on sound output levels at different frequencies.
Figure 18 presents the measurement for no touch, pinching
with three fingers and full hand contact conditions. The data
show that the effect of a single digit touching the speaker is
negligible, and, indeed, during the experiments we were
unable to hear any discernable difference. When a whole
hand is placed on the speaker the sound pressure level drops
~10dB on average, which is expected. Indeed, any sound
source is muffled when covered with a human hand.
This property of ESR printed speakers is quite unique, as
the same does not hold true for traditional electromagnetic
loudspeakers. In electromagnetic speakers only the voice
coil vibrates, other speaker parts are passive, solely transfer-

5. Speakers can be touched and manipulated by the
user’s hand without a noticeable decrease in speaker
sound quality, providing the possibility for simple
tactile feedback; and

Diaphragm

Magnet
Voice coil

6. The resulting speakers are simple, inexpensive, low
powered and can be run from a battery.

Obstruct
Diaphragm

a.

b.

Electrode

Figure 17. The diaphragm can vibrate when user holds an
object creating effective tactile feedback.

Figure 18. Printed speaker performance when touched by the
user: a) no touch, b) three finger pinch and c) holding with
both hands.

ring and amplifying these vibration forces. Therefore,
touching the diaphragm of an electromagnetic speaker anywhere significantly impedes its operation (Figure 17).
The fact that printed speakers can be touched and held in
the hand means that we can use them to communicate simple tactile feedback to the user. In our early tests we discovered that the user can clearly feel bursts of signals at the 20
~ 120 Hz frequency range. We will investigate this exciting
and unique property of printed speakers in future work.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

This paper reports on the design and investigation of 3D
printed speaker technology based on electrostatic sound
reproduction principles. Experimental evaluation of 3D
printed speakers demonstrates that, among other things:
1. It is possible to produce audible sound with a broad
range of speaker geometries at about 60 dBSPL;
2. We can effectively control the directivity of sound
by changing the shape of the speakers and using
various electrode arrays;
3. Multiple speaker shapes can be designed and embedded into objects and devices;
4. 3D printed speakers provide unique interaction
properties, such as tracking and identification using
ultrasonic frequencies;

There are also a number of limitations of 3D printed speaker technology that warrant further research efforts:
First, the current implementation of 3D printed speakers
requires manual assembly. 3D printers that are capable of
printing with conductive materials are not accessible at this
moment. However, the principles of the design and application of 3D printed speakers are general and scalable. They
do not depend on the limitations of current technology. We
believe that in the near future 3D printers capable of printing with conductive materials will become commonplace,
and the vision of 3D printed speakers will become a reality.
Second, although a large variety of shapes can be used to
make effective 3D printed speakers, there are also limitations. The most critical limitation is avoiding shapes that
result in a charge concentration along sharp edges. Such a
charge concentration would result in isolation breakdown
and a short circuit between the body and diaphragm, with
adverse effect on sound reproduction.
Third, the direction of sound strongly depends on object
shape. Therefore, special care should be taken in using object shapes that allow for the sound directions that are appropriate for the applications where the object is used.
Fourth, the sound level produced by 3D printed speakers is
appropriate for small hand-held objects and devices but may
not be effective in large scale or outdoor applications unless
the size of the diaphragm is significantly increased.
Fifth, the ESR technology and 3D printed speakers are less
effective for low frequency sound playback than for medium and high frequency sounds. The human voice, birds,
animals, nature sounds, stringed instruments and computergenerated blips are some of the examples of the content that
can be effectively reproduced on 3D printed speakers.
In the future we plan on exploring the interactive applications of 3D printed speakers, especially focusing on ultrasonic tracking, tactile feedback and enhancing both of these
applications with touch sensitivity. Additional planned research will focus on exploring printed speaker arrays and
developing techniques for printing very large printed speakers.
REFERENCES

1.

Brown, J.A., Dunphy, K., Leadbetter, J.R., Adamson,
R.B.A., and Beslin, O. Fabrication and performance of
a single-crystal lead magnesium niobate-lead titanate
cylindrical hydrophone. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 134, 2 (2013), 1031–1038.

2.

Calì, J., Calian, D.A., Amati, C., et al. 3D-printing of
non-assembly, articulated models. ACM Trans. on
Graphics 31, 6 (2012), 1–8.

3.

Clemens, W., Fix, W., Ficker, J., Knobloch, A., and
Ullmann, A. From polymer transistors toward printed
electronics. Journal of Materials Research 19, 07
(2011), 1963–1973.

4.

Economist. Print me a Stradivarius. Economist, 2011.
http://www.economist.com/.

5.

Follmer, S., Carr, D., Lovell, E., and Ishii, H. CopyCAD: remixing physical objects with copy and paste
from the real world. In Adjunct proc. UIST ’10, ACM
Press (2010), 381–382.

6.

7.

Gong, N.W., Hodges, S., and Paradiso, J.A. Leveraging conductive inkjet technology to build a scalable
and versatile surface for ubiquitous sensing. In Proc.
UbiComp ’11, ACM Press (2011), 45–54.
Gupta, S., Morris, D., Patel, S., Tan, D. SoundWave:
using the doppler effect to sense gestures. In Proc.
CHI ’12, ACM Press (2012), 1911–1914.

16.

Lopes, A.J., MacDonald, E., and Wicker, R.B. Integrating stereolithography and direct print technologies
for 3D structural electronics fabrication. Rapid Prototyping Journal 18, 2 (2012), 129–143.

17.

Malone, E. and Lipson, H. Freeform fabrication of
ionomeric polymer-metal composite actuators. Rapid
Prototyping Journal 12, 5 (2006), 244–253.

18.

Malone, E. and Lipson, H. Multi-material freeform
fabrication of active systems. ESDA’08, ASME
(2008), 1–9.

19.

Medley, A.P., Billson, D.R., Hutchins, D.A., and Davis, L.A.J. Properties of an electrostatic transducer.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 120,
5 (2006), 2658–2667.

20.

Mueller, S., Lopes, P., and Baudisch, P. Interactive
construction: interactive fabrication of functional mechanical devices. In Proc. UIST ’12, ACM Press
(2012), 599–606.

21.

Peek, F.W. Dielectric Phenomena in High Voltage
Engineering. McGraw-Hill, 1929.

8.

Hanna, C.R. Theory of the electrostatic loud speaker.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 2, 2
(1930), 143–149.

22.

Saul, G., Lau, M., Mitani, J., and Igarashi, T. SketchChair: An All-in-one Chair Design System for End
Users. In Proc. TEI ’11, ACM Press (2011), 73–80.

9.

Hodges, S., Taylor, S., Villar, N., Scott, J., and
Helmes, J. Exploring physical prototyping techniques
for functional devices using .NET gadgeteer. In Proc.
TEI ’13, ACM Press (2013), 271–274.

23.

Savage, V., Chang, C., and Hartmann, B. Sauron:
Embedded Single-Camera Sensing of Printed Physical
User Interfaces | EECS at UC Berkeley. .

24.

10.

Kawahara, Y., Hodges, S., Cook, B.S., Zhang, C., and
Abowd, G.D. Instant inkjet circuits. In Proc.
UbiComp ’13, ACM Press (2013), 363–372.

Sayin, U., Artís, P., and Guasch, O. Realization of an
omnidirectional source of sound using parametric
loudspeakers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 134, 3 (2013), 1899–1907.

11.

Keplinger, C., Sun, J.Y., Foo, C.C., Rothemund, P.,
Whitesides, G.M., Suo, Z. Stretchable, Transparent,
Ionic Conductors. Science 341, 6149 (2013), 984–987.

25.

12.

Langevin, R.A. The Electro-Acoustic Sensitivity of
Cylindrical Ceramic Tubes. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 26, 3 (1954), 421–427.

Sugimoto, T., Ono, K., Ando, A., Morita, Y., Hosoda,
K., and Ishii, D. Semicylindrical acoustic transducer
from a dielectric elastomer film with compliant electrodes. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 130, 2 (2011), 744–752.

26.

TTPgroup. Chemical, ceramic and even biological 3D
printing is now a reality as TTP unveils new multimaterial breakthrough.
http://www.ttpgroup.com/news/press/.

27.

Vidimče, K., Wang, S.P., Ragan-Kelley, J., and
Matusik, W. OpenFab: A programmable pipeline for
multi-material fabrication. SIGGRAPH 2013, ACM
Press (2013), Article 136.

28.

Willis, K., Brockmeyer, E., Hudson, S., and Poupyrev,
I. Printed optics. In Proc. UIST ’12, ACM Press
(2012), 589–598.

29.

STAX Ltd., http://www.stax.co.jp/.

13.

Lau, M., Mitani, J., and Igarashi, T. Digital Fabrication. Computer 45, 12 (2012), 76–79.

14.

Leigh, S.J., Bradley, R.J., Purssell, C.P., Billson, D.R.,
and Hutchins, D.A. A simple, low-cost conductive
composite material for 3D printing of electronic sensors. PloS one 7, 11 (2012), e49365: 1–6.

15.

LLoyd, B., Goldman, R.B., and Roop, R.W. Design
and Performance of a High-Frequency Electrostatic
Speaker. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 27, 6 (1955), 1128–1133.

