MlioLight: Multi-Layered Image Overlay
Using Multiple Flashlights
Toshiki Sato and Hideki Koike
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-city, Tokyo, Japan
info@vogue.cs.titech.ac.jp
We propose a technique that overlays natural images on the
real world using the information from multiple flashlight devices. We focus on finding areas of overlapping lights in a
multiple light-source scenario and overlaying multi-layered
information on a real world object in these areas. In order
to mix multiple images, we developed a light identification
and overlapping area detection technique using rapid synchronization between high-speed cameras and multiple light
devices. In this paper, we describe the concept of our system and a prototype implementation. We also describe two
different applications.

the main projection processes, which consist of setting the
projector image area, correcting distortion, and detecting the
area overlapped by multiple lights. In addition, in multiple
mobile projector situations, the image luminance and color
of the overlapped projection area should be corrected to improve visibility. These calculations have a direct effect on the
sensation of using a flashlight; however, it is not so easy for
small devices to calculate these variables in real time. In this
research, we focused on a projector-camera system to address
these limitations. We propose a novel projector-camera based
system that can provide users with a multi-layered imageoverlay experience using multiple flashlight devices.

Author Keywords

MLIOLIGHT SYSTEM

Multiple Flashlights; Projection Mapping; Magic Lens

We propose a novel projector-camera based multi-flashlight
detection system called “MlioLight.” The system has three
main capabilities: low-latency/accurate image projection that
reproduces the complete sensation of using flashlight, identification of multiple lights in multi-user scenarios, and overlapped area detection and information synthesis in multi-light
scenarios.

ABSTRACT

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.1. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Multimedia Information Systems
INTRODUCTION

A flashlight is a useful light device that has been used for
many decades, and the “flashlight metaphor” has been incorporated into a variety of information presentation techniques
as an easy way to find or overlay information.Flashlights have
also been used for multi-user interactions [1]. In a multi-user
or multi-flashlight scenario, lights pointed in the same direction naturally overlap with each other. Detecting the overlapped illuminated area enables the system to determine the
area of interest that is shared by users. In addition, displaying synthesized information on the overlapped area promotes
communication between users.

In this system, a flashlight device emits an invisible infrared
(IR) light toward the target object. The diffusion of the IR
light on the target’s surface is captured by the IR camera and
is immediately visualized by the visible light projector in the
projection on the screen. The light pattern is used as a blend
factor for mixing the background and foreground textures and
colors of the screen image. This approach enables the system
to reduce the computational cost and latency of accurate projection onto real world objects.
In addition to these basic projection processes, the system
transmits a few bits of information in a radio signal to
the individual flashlight devices at every shutter activation.
This signal communication enables the system to control the
switching (on and off) of the individual light devices. By
turning on and off the lights, the system can easily and precisely separate the overlapping light images and detect or
identify the light source and overlapped illuminated area in
pixel units. These processes enable the system to synthesize
multi-layered images and also project a variety of information
on the overlapping light area.

In recent research in the HCI field, especially on interactive
surfaces or augmented reality, a small projector has been employed as a flashlight-like device that can project information anywhere in the real world [4]. However, there are some
problems with using a projector as a flashlight. In a small
projector-based system, the flashlight must obtain its threedimensional (3D) position and orientation as well as the 3D
shape of the projection target. This information is used for

RELATED WORK

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985719

Motion capture systems have been used in previous research
[1] to detect and identify multiple lights. However, motion
capture cameras require multiple markers to be attached to
the light devices, which limits the usability of the flashlight.
To detect multiple light devices, invisible two-dimensional

107

barcode have been used in previous research [2]. However,
the hardware configuration may become more complex because a special IR projector and camera-implemented light
are needed. In addition, the processing cost and latency of
the system also increases. Light can be separated by using
multiple bandpass filters and multiple-wavelength lights [3].
In this method, however, multiple cameras or a bandpass filter
switching mechanism are required; thus, the maximum number of lights is greatly restricted.

Figure 2. Three-light overlapping separation example (left) and projection result (right)

IMPLEMENTATION

browsing content based on an anatomical chart, different internal organs are assigned to different light devices. If multiple lights are mixed at a specific location, a different image
is displayed (in this example, naturally synthesized images of
multiple organs). In this application, the light images captured by the cameras are binarized to increase a visibility of
overlay image. In another browsing application with multilanguage translation content, a web page is displayed on the
large screen. The user can browse the translation result by
pointing at a specific location with one of several lights that
are each assigned to a different language. In this application, a light image that is smaller in size is displayed on the
higher-level layer to avoid interference between the different
languages.
We also developed a game application using a 3D projection
target. This application provides the players with the experience of exploring a 3D projected target in the real world
with the lights. In this application, the players try to capture a
variety of characters that are hidden on the 3D object in cooperation with other players. In addition, the system counts the
number of light layers. To find unique characters, the players
must shine two or more lights at the same location. This rule
promotes communication between users and increases their
enjoyment of the game.

Figure 1. System hardware (left) and light device (right)

The left side of Figure 1 shows the hardware configuration of
our prototype system. The system is composed of four components: a signal transmitter, an image processing system for
capturing and identifying the light image, a projection unit
for projection mapping, and multiple light devices with signal receivers. Each light device (Figure 2, right) has an IR
light source composed of 72 IR LEDs (850 nm) and a 2.4
GHz radio signal receiver with a micro-controller (nRF51).
The on/off state of individual light devices can be controlled
by the radio signal sent from the signal transmitter at every
shutter activation (over 150 fps). The image processing unit
is composed of an IR camera, external trigger controller, and
image processing system (on a PC) with an RF signal transmitter. The image processing system sends a light control
signal via a transmitter before firing the shutter of the cameras. If three overlapped lights are captured by the camera,
the system sequentially captures two different images with
different IR signal transmissions that have bits 101 and 010,
respectively (Figure 2, left). This process enables the system
to separate overlapping lights into different frames (Figure 2,
right). The IR image captured by the cameras is sent to the
image processing PC and used to calculate its position, size,
and shape information. Simultaneously, all camera images
are transferred to the GPU as multiple layers of texture data.
The final projection image is flexibly synthesized by a fragment shader program and rapidly projected onto the target by
the projector. Note that our system can not only project onto a
planar target (i.e., a wall-size or tabletop screen) but can also
project onto a 3D projection target using multiple projectors
and cameras.

REFERENCES

1. Cao, X., Forlines, C., and Balakrishnan, R. Multi-user
interaction using handheld projectors. In Proceedings of
the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, UIST ’07, ACM (New York,
NY, USA, 2007), 43–52.
2. Chan, L.-W., Wu, H.-T., Kao, H.-S., Ko, J.-C., Lin, H.-R.,
Chen, M. Y., Hsu, J., and Hung, Y.-P. Enabling
beyond-surface interactions for interactive surface with an
invisible projection. In Proceedings of the 23Nd Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, UIST ’10, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2010), 263–272.
3. Sakaguchi, S., Tono, H., Tanaka, T., and Matsushita, M.
Restive shadow: Animating invisible shadows for
expanding shadowgraph experience. In SIGGRAPH Asia
2013 Emerging Technologies, SA ’13, ACM (New York,
NY, USA, 2013), 16:1–16:2.

APPLICATIONS

Our system can provide variety of visual content that is multilayered and customizable using the GPU programming. One
application we developed is a 2D visual content browsing application using a wall-sized display. The user can browse
for hidden information by pointing a light device at a specific location on the wall, as if it were a magic lens. When

4. Yoshida, T., Hirobe, Y., Nii, H., Kawakami, N., and
Tachi, S. Twinkle: Interacting with physical surfaces
using handheld projector. In Proceedings of the 2010
IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, VR ’10, IEEE
Computer Society (Washington, DC, USA, 2010), 87–90.

108

