Wolverine: A Wearable Haptic Interface for Grasping in VR
Inrak Choi
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
irchoi@stanford.edu

Sean Follmer
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
sfollmer@stanford.edu

Figure 1. Wolverine, a new wearable haptic user interface for grasping in virtual reality, holding various geometric shapes.

glove-style haptic interface, CyberGrasp [1], was launched
commercially in 1990s. Since then, there have been other
exoskeleton force-feedback gloves developed using different
mechanisms [2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10]. Other researchers have explored providing force directly between the fingers and the
palm to simulate palm opposition type grasping, such as the
Rutgers Master II [3]. Most related to our work are devices
which provide forces directly between the fingers and thumb
to simulate pad opposition type grips. Zhang et al. explored
an electroactive polymer actuator (DESR) between the thumb
and forefingers, however it has a limited range of motion [11].
So far, researchers have focused on developing haptic gloves
generating realistic stimuli of soft objects, as such they sacrificed wearability; Such systems are often large and cumbersome.

ABSTRACT

The Wolverine is a mobile, wearable haptic device designed
for simulating the grasping of rigid objects in virtual environment. In contrast to prior work on force feedback gloves,
we focus on creating a low cost, lightweight, and wireless
device that renders a force directly between the thumb and
three fingers to simulate objects held in pad opposition type
grasps. Leveraging low-power brake-based locking sliders,
the system can withstand over 100N of force between each
finger and the thumb, and only consumes 2.78 Wh(10 mJ) for
each braking interaction. Integrated sensors are used both for
feedback control and user input: time-of-flight sensors provide the position of each finger and an IMU provides overall
orientation tracking. This design enables us to use the device
for roughly 6 hours with 5500 full fingered grasping events.
The total weight is 55g including a 350 mAh battery.

We present a device, termed the Wolverine system, that provides the sensation of grasping a rigid object by resisting relative motion between the fingers and thumb (Figure 1)[4].
Our focus is on supporting a wide range of motion in a
lightweight, low-cost package; however, we sacrifice active
force feedback in order to achieve this goal.

Author Keywords

Wearable haptic interfaces; virtual reality; force feedback
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. User Interfaces: Haptic I/O, Input devices and strategies, Interaction styles: Miscellaneous

SYSTEM DESIGN

INTRODUCTION

Though Virtual Reality (VR) has been explored in research
contexts since the late 1950s, recent advances in display technology have made consumer VR a reality. While new devices
such as the Oculus Rift or HTC Vive provide high resolution
visuals, the user input devices have been limited to traditional
styles of gestural input. It is desirable to allow users to touch
what they can see and physically manipulate virtual objects.
Researchers have developed glove-style haptic interfaces to
give users more degrees of freedom in motion. The first
Figure 2. Wolverine system overview.

The Wolverine is composed of a base, which mounts on the
thumb, and three connected rods, each of which has a sliding
mount for the tips of the index, middle, and ring fingers (Figure 2). Each sliding mount has an active brake that can lock
onto the respective rod. Therefore, the three finger tips are
physically connected to the thumb tip through an exoskeleton

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985725

117

Grasp Type
Actuator Type
Force Feedback
Maximum Force
Motion Range
Power Source
Weight

Wolverine

CyberGrasp [1]

Rutgers Master II [3]

DESR [11]

pad opposition
one-way brake
constant stiffness
106N
20-160mm
built-in battery
55g

pad, palm, side opposition
dc motor with wire driven
variable stiffness
12N
full hand closing
external cable
450g

palm opposition
pneumatic cylinder
variable stiffness
16N
27mm stroke
external cable
185g

pad opposition
electroactive polymer
variable stiffness
7.2N
5mm stroke
external cable
38g

Table 1. Comparisons with other devices.

structure that can generate precision grasping motions. The
rods are connected to the base with ball joints (3 DOF each),
and the sliding mounts are connected to the rods with cylindrical joints (2 DOF each). The supporting structures physically in contact with the three finger tips are connected to
the sliding mounts with revolute joints (1 DOF each). Due to
its many degrees of freedom and low friction and inertia, this
structure allows the hand to move freely.

finger and the end of the rod rather than between the finger
and the thumb, the sensor does not interfere each other. A
9-axis IMU (InvenSense MPU9250) is coupled to a thumb
to measure orientation. With a single orientation sensor, we
assume the thumb represents the orientation of the hand.
PERFORMANCE

We use a brake to render virtual objects in order to make the
Wolverine compact and energy efficient. A brake system, in
general, guarantees stable motions because it can only dissipate energy, and is more compact than active actuators of the
same strength. However, brake systems can only resist motion, which could lead to an unnatural grasping sensation if
there is any resistance when the user opens his or her hand.
Figure 4. Force - displacement
measurement of the brake.

Figure 5. Position error compensation result with a forward
model.

The curve in Figure 4 shows the stiffness during braking is
162N/mm. The maximum force before slipping is 106N,
which is larger than the maximum forces generated from precision grasps; 77.4N for men and 51.0 N for women [9].
Also, the device has reliable performance over a wide range
of grasping speeds by adapting a forward model to compensate actuation, sensing and communication lags (Figure 5).
Figure 3. One-way brake mechanism.

Table 1 shows that the Wolverine can provide a large range
of motion and high resistance forces, but all other systems
provide variable stiffness. The trend toward mobile VR applications like the Samsung Galaxy VR makes the Wolverine device particularly interesting. The lightweight, batterypowered design could be consumer friendly, and the processing of binary output signals is computationally simple, making it feasible even on mobile processors.

Therefore, we propose a mechanism for directional braking in
haptic applications. As shown in Figure 3 (A), in the default
state with the actuation off, the levers is in the “out” position.
The hole in the lever through which the rod passes is coaxial
with the rod, allowing the sliding mount to move freely along
the rod. In order to lock the sliding mount, a 6mm diameter
dc motor is turned ON and pulls a wire that rotates the lever
counterclockwise. Now the hole through is no longer coaxial with the rod, and jamming occurs. As the user applies
a force pulling the sliding mount toward the thumb, Tendon
1 becomes taut, further rotating the lever counterclockwise.
The controller then turns off the power, but the brake is still
engaged. This stage can last as long as necessary to complete
the desired task in virtual reality. Once the user finishes the
task and opens his or her hand, the elastic Tendon 2 rotates
the lever back clockwise. The user can freely move his or her
finger away from the thumb.

DEMONSTRATION

In this demonstration, visitors will be able to use the Wolverine system to grasp a number of virtual, simple, 2D shapes,
similar to those shown in Figure 1. However, the system
will not be integrated with an VR headset. In addition, a
video demonstrating the technical details and evaluation will
be played.
FUTURE WORK

Future work will focus on building up the rest of the infrastructure for performing user studies to validate its use. For
such studies, we would like to integrate the device with a
consumer VR display. In order to do so, we need to know
the position of all fingers and the thumb. Since finger position is measured locally with respect to the thumb, and the
IMU provides the orientation of the thumb, all that is needed
is the 3-axis global coordinates of the thumb. For this a simple motion tracking sensor would be adequate.

It is important to note that the dc motors are only used for initiating braking (Figure 3 (B-C)), but not required to maintain
braking once the user is applying a force that pulls the sliding
mount toward the thumb (Figure 3 (D)).
Sensors are integrated into the system in order to measure
the position and orientation of the system. A Time-of-Flight
(ToF) sensor (STMicroelectronics VL6180X) is mounted at
the tip of each rod. Because we measure position between the

118

7. Lee, Y., and Ryu, D. Wearable haptic glove using micro
hydraulic system for control of construction robot
system with vr environment. In Multisensor Fusion and
Integration for Intelligent Systems, 2008. MFI 2008.
IEEE International Conference on, IEEE (2008),
638–643.

REFERENCES

1. Cybergrasp, cyberglove systems inc.
http://www.cyberglovesystems.com/cybergrasp/.

Accessed: 2016-02-28.
2. Blake, J., and Gurocak, H. B. Haptic glove with mr
brakes for virtual reality. Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME
Transactions on 14, 5 (2009), 606–615.

8. Nam, Y., Park, M., and Yamane, R. Smart glove: hand
master using magnetorheological fluid actuators. In
International Workshop and Conference on Photonics
and Nanotechnology 2007, International Society for
Optics and Photonics (2007), 679434–679434.

3. Bouzit, M., Burdea, G., Popescu, G., and Boian, R. The
rutgers master ii-new design force-feedback glove.
Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on 7, 2 (2002),
256–263.

9. Swanson, A. B., Matev, I. B., and De Groot, G. The
strength of the hand. Bull Prosthet Res 10, 14 (1970),
145–153.

4. Choi, I., Hawkes, E., Christensen, D., Ploch, C., and
Follmer, S. Wolverine: A wearable haptic interface for
grasping in virtual reality. 2016.

10. Winter, S. H., and Bouzit, M. Use of
magnetorheological fluid in a force feedback glove.
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on 15, 1 (2007), 2–8.

5. Koyama, T., Yamano, I., Takemura, K., and Maeno, T.
Multi-fingered exoskeleton haptic device using passive
force feedback for dexterous teleoperation. In Intelligent
Robots and Systems, 2002. IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, vol. 3, IEEE (2002), 2905–2910.

11. Zhang, R., Kunz, A., Lochmatter, P., and Kovacs, G.
Dielectric elastomer spring roll actuators for a portable
force feedback device. In Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
Environment and Teleoperator Systems, 2006 14th
Symposium on, IEEE (2006), 347–353.

6. Koyanagi, K., Fujii, Y., and Furusho, J. Development of
vr-stef system with force display glove system. In
Proceedings of the 2005 international conference on
Augmented tele-existence, ACM (2005), 91–97.

119

