Applications of Switchable Permanent Magnetic Actuators
in Shape Change and Tactile Display
Evan Strasnick
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
estrasni@stanford.edu

Sean Follmer
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
sfollmer@stanford.edu

Figure 1: Applications of a power-efficient switchable permanent magnetic actuator. From left to right: A 5 mm pitch linear
tactile display; A self-actuated keyboard; A mobile device tactile display; A haptically augmented steering wheel.
We explore the use of bi-stable permanent magnet actuators
for tactile display. The switchable magnets are comprised of
a low-corecivity permanent magnet surrounded by a solenoid
coil. By briefly pulsing a high current through the wire, the
low coercivity magnet can be permanently remagnetized in
the opposite direciton. After power is disconnected, the magnet remains in the new state, making the actuator more power
efficient than an equivalent electromagnet by orders of magnitude depending on the frequency of switching.

ABSTRACT

Systems realizing shape change and tactile display remain
hindered by the power, cost, and size limitations of current
actuation technology. We describe and evaluate a novel use of
switchable permanent magnets as a bistable actuator for haptic feedback which draws power only when switching states.
Because of their efficiency, low cost, and small size, these actuators show promise in realizing tactile display within mobile, wearable, and embedded systems. We present several
applications demonstrating potential uses in the mobile, automotive, and desktop computing domains, and perform a technical evaluation of the actuators used in these systems.

ACTUATOR DESIGN

Permanent magnet actuators have been used across a range
of configurations and domains [3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18,
17, 20, 19]. Our design places a strong NdFeB magnet coaxially above the AlNiCo switching magnet (see Figure 2). The
switching magnet is anchored, while a pin connected to the
top of the NdFeB magnet and threaded through a fixed surface constrains its motion to the axial dimension. A spacer
sets a minimum separation between the two magnets, as the
field from the NdFeB magnet increases the current required
to coerce the AlNiCo magnet when in close proximity.

Author Keywords

tactile; display; haptic; shape change; low-power; low-cost;
magnet; magnetic; actuator; low coercivity; mobile;
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation: Haptic I/O
INTRODUCTION

Implementations of shape change and tactile display offer
promising interactions in the mobile, wearable, and embedded domains. However, engineering such systems has remained a challenge due to the power consumption of existing
actuation methods, such as motors [2, 7, 8], SMA’s [16], and
pneumatics [5, 6]. Given a small, low-cost, low-power actuator, we could drastically expand the design possibilities for
dynamic physical interactions across the variety of devices
and form factors in use today.

In this configuration, when the two magnets are aligned in
the same direction along the axial dimension, the NdFeB is
pulled down to the bottom layer. Similarly, when the magnets are aligned oppositely, the NdFeB magnet is repelled to
the top layer, actuating the pin. The range of motion for the
actuator was chosen to be 1.5mm, allowing for visible shape
change while maintaining a relatively high output force in the
actuated state (the static output force decreases as the NdFeB magnet travels further from the switching magnet). Prior
psychophysiological results show that users can detect a protrusion as little as .2 mm in depth on their fingertips [9].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985728

The actuator has a simple drive circuit. A power MOSFET
h-bridge, controlled by logic-level signals, regulates current
flow through the coil. To prevent large current draws from
a power supply, a large capacitor is charged to the supply

123

Switchable Permanent Magnet
Power (W)
Force (N) (Min Travel)
Force (N) (Max Travel)
Height (mm)

.01f **
.43 (Attraction), .16 (Repulsion)
.10 (Attraction), .07 (Repulsion)
13.08 (at max travel, not including pin)
4
1.59
Bi-stable
Yes
140

Diameter (mm)
Maximum Travel (mm)
Travel Type
Back-drivability
Maximum Switching
Frequency (Hz)
Cost (quantity = 1000)
$3.49
** f is the switching frequency

Figure 2: The actuator in its attracting and repelling states.
voltage and then discharged over the coil during a switching
pulse, as described by Knaian [10]. A custom pcb was designed to drive an array of our actuators using 100 uF capacitors, MPQ8039 half-bridges, flyback diodes, bootstrap capacitors, and an Arduino Mega 2560 microcontroller.

Table 1: Technical details for the implemented switchable
permanent magnet actuator.
can demonstrate corresponding keyboard shortcuts to assist
in learning. Users can also ”set” keys down for command
sequences or physically play back macros. Built-in forcesensing resistors enable the keyboard to recognize touch inputs on keys that are already clamped down.

The physical dimensions of the actuator can be chosen based
on the application. Larger permanent magnets can provide
greater force output. The gauge of the wire used to wrap the
AlNiCo magnet can be increased as well to reduce the operating voltage.

Information Display in an Automobile

Finally, the actuator is easily augmented with input capabilities. For recognition of simple taps, a pushbutton switch can
be used as the spacer between the two magnets. We instead
utilize force-sensing resistors for more sophisticated recognition, allowing us to detect even if the user is pressing down
on the actuator in its clamped state.

A Thrustmaster T80 RS controller was used to prototype a
tactile display built into a car steering wheel. Actuators lining the sides of the wheel can haptically display speed, navigational instructions, etc., or form context-dependent buttons.
This allows the driver to receive and respond to notifications
without diverting their visual attention from the road.

TECHNICAL EVALUATION

Table 1 shows technical specifications of our implementation
of the actuator. Forces were calculated using the FEMM finite
element analysis package, then verified empirically [14].

LIMITATIONS

Despite its efficiency, the switchable permanent magnetic actuator has a number of trade-offs with conventional actuation methods in tactile display. Firstly, as a bi-stable actuator, it has only two discrete positional states. In addition, as
multiple actuators in close proximity produce interference, a
minimum separation between actuators on the order of centimeters is required for proper functionality, increasing the
dimensions and/or limiting the resolution of a tactile display.
Finally, because the magnetic field weakens with increasing
distance, a longer travel equates to a weaker output force in
the repelling state. As a result, designing systems with significant visual as well as tactile shape change becomes less
feasible.

APPLICATIONS

We prototyped three example applications of the switchable
permanent magnetic actuator, shown in Figure 1.
Tactile Display on Mobile Devices

Ten actuators were assembled on the side of a mobile device
to replicate the interactions of Jang et al.’s Haptic Edge Display at a lower power consumption [9]. The display allows
for information presentation and dynamic physical controls
to enrich mobile interactions. The display has a pitch of 5
mm and a travel of 1.5mm. Each actuator is individually
addressable, allowing the creation of expressive waveforms,
context-dependent buttons, rich haptic notifications, physical
scrollbars, and other dynamic physical elements.

CONCLUSION

Switchable permanent magnet actuators can be used for lowcost, power efficient tactile display. Despite limitations in
force, travel, and resolution compared to conventional methods, they have the potential to facilitate dynamic physical
change in mobile, wearable, and embedded devices. It is our
vision that utilizing such efficient actuators will aid us in realizing novel interactions throughout the physical world.

Haptic Augmentations for Input Devices

Actuators were added to the keys on a small keyboard, enabling keys to type themselves. As with Bailly et al.’s
Métamorphe, the device has a number of uses as an instructional interface [1]. In an unfamiliar application, it

124

11. Knaian, A. N., Cheung, K. C., Lobovsky, M. B., Oines,
A. J., Schmidt-Neilsen, P., and Gershenfeld, N. A. The
Milli-Motein: A self-folding chain of programmable
matter with a one centimeter module pitch. IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (2012), 1447–1453.

REFERENCES

1. Bailly, G., Pietrzak, T., Deber, J., and Wigdor, D. J.
Métamorphe: Augmenting hotkey usage with actuated
keys. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 2013), 563–572.
2. Dimitriadis, P., and Alexander, J. Evaluating the
effectiveness of physical shape-change for in-pocket
mobile device notifications. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’14, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2014),
2589–2592.
3. Gilpin, K. W. Shape formation by self-disassembly in
programmable matter systems. PhD thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2012.
4. Haghighat, B., Droz, E., and Martinoli, A. Lily: A
miniature floating robotic platform for programmable
stochastic self-assembly. 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (2015),
1941–1948.
5. Harrison, C., and Hudson, S. E. Providing dynamically
changeable physical buttons on a visual display. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’09, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2009), 299–308.
6. He, L., Xu, C., Xu, D., and Brill, R. Pneuhaptic:
Delivering haptic cues with a pneumatic armband. In
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Symposium
on Wearable Computers, ISWC ’15, ACM (New York,
NY, USA, 2015), 47–48.
7. Hemmert, F., Hamann, S., Löwe, M., Zeipelt, J., and
Joost, G. Shape-changing mobiles: Tapering in
two-dimensional deformational displays in mobile
phones. In CHI ’10 Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’10, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2010), 3075–3080.
8. Hemmert, F., Joost, G., Knörig, A., and Wettach, R.
Dynamic knobs: Shape change as a means of interaction
on a mobile phone. In CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’08,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2008), 2309–2314.
9. Jang, S., Kim, L. H., Tanner, K., Ishii, H., and Follmer,
S. Haptic edge display for mobile tactile interaction. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’16, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2016).
10. Knaian, A. N. Electropermanent magnetic connectors
and actuators: devices and their application in
programmable matter. PhD thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2010.

12. Marchese, A. D., Onal, C. D., and Rus, D. Soft robot
actuators using energy-efficient valves controlled by
electropermanent magnets. In 2011 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (Sept 2011), 756–761.
13. Marchese, A. D., Onal, C. D., and Rus, D. Towards a
Self-contained Soft Robotic Fish: On-Board Pressure
Generation and Embedded Electro-permanent Magnet
Valves. Springer International Publishing, Heidelberg,
2013, 41–54.
14. Meeker, D. Finite element method magnetics, 2014.
15. Ochoa-Cardenas, F., and Dodd, T. J. Design of an active
magnetic wheel with a varying electro-permanent
magnet adhesion mechanism. In Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on (Sept 2015), 3340–3345.
16. Park, Y.-W., Park, J., and Nam, T.-J. Bendi:
Shape-changing mobile device for a tactile-visual phone
conversation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI EA ’15, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2015), 181–181.
17. Tugwell, J., Brennan, P., OShea, C., ODonoghue, K.,
Power, T., OShea, M., Griffiths, J., Cahill, R., and
Cantillon-Murphy, P. Electropermanent magnetic
anchoring for surgery and endoscopy. Biomedical
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 62, 3 (2015),
842–848.
18. Ward, P., and Liu, D. Design of a high capacity electro
permanent magnetic adhesion for climbing robots. In
Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2012 IEEE
International Conference on, IEEE (2012), 217–222.
19. Yatchev, I., Hinov, K., and Gueorgiev, V. Dynamic
characteristics of a bitable linear actuator with moving
permanent magnet. Serbian journal of electrical
engineering 1, 2 (2004), 207–214.
20. Yatchev, I., Hinov, K., and Trifonov, N. Characteristics
of a bistable permanent magnet linear actuator with soft
magnetic mover. International Journal of Applied
Electromagnetics and Mechanics 27, 1,2 (2008), 43 –
52.

125

