Music Composition with Recommendation
Junki Kikuchi
Future University Hakodate
Hakodate, Japan
g2115010@fun.ac.jp

Hidekatsu Yanagi
Future University Hakodate
Hakodate, Japan
yanagi@fun.ac.jp

Yoshiaki Mima
Future University Hakodate
Hakodate, Japan
mima@fun.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

Creating a piece of music requires deep knowledge of
composition, and is time-consuming even for experts.
Algorithmic composition systems can generate pieces in an
existing style. However, these systems are not interactive.
Therefore, it is difficult for them to express the user’s intention.
We propose a system that recommends a continuation
melody in accordance with a melody expressed by the user.
Recommendation uses the style of the piece of the composer, thus
users give the system a piece of the style in which they want to
compose. With this system, users can compose pieces tailored to
their needs, and composers can get assistance with composition.

Figure 1. Example of music composition with recommendation.
Our system proposes a continuation melody in accordance with
the melody entered by the user.

Author Keywords

Music; music composition; recommendation; interaction;
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation: User Interfaces.
INTRODUCTION

In music composition, composers face the following two
difficulties: 1) Keeping within the constraints imposed by the
multiple layers of structure, such as the style and form of the piece.
2) While keeping within those constraints, continuing to create new
material until the piece is completed. Pachet [5] has categorized
musical systems to solve each problem into 1) interactive music
systems and 2) music imitation systems. 1) Interactive music
systems propose ways of transforming musical input into musical
output. Korg Kaossilator [3] and Yamaha TENORI-ON [6] convert
the pitch entered by the user to a pitch of specific tone. Using these
systems, melody can be expressed even by users who do not have
composition skills. However, for such users it is difficult to express
a particular style or to create all the melodies that constitute the
piece. 2) Music imitation systems represent stylistic information to
generate pieces in various styles. These systems represent the
musical styles of existing composers [1, 2, 4]. Therefore, music
imitation systems enable anyone to generate pieces. However, since
these are not interactive, it is difficult for users to intervene in
composition. We propose a system to recommend how to create
Figure 2. Overall picture of music composition with
recommendation.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985733

melodies, in order to allow anyone with intention to compose.
Before beginning composition, users provide a piece of the style
that they are aiming to recreate and our system proposes a
continuation melody in accordance with this. (Figure 1) With this
system, users can compose pieces tailored to their needs, and
composers can get assistance with composition.

137

Figure 3. Composition Interface. This is built on a Microsoft
Surface Pro 3, and is operated by the Surface Pen. Composed
pieces are output from the USB Speaker.
RECOMMENDATION METHOD

Figure 2 shows our pipeline for music composition with
recommendation. A user begins by providing a piece of music.
Our system then divides the melody of the piece into pitch
transition and rhythm. After the division is complete, these
data are entered into their respective databases. When a user
enters a note on the composition interface, our system searches
the pitch transition database for pitches to which is it possible
to transition from the pitch entered by the user, and
recommends a list of these pitches. The length of the note
presented by our system is determined by the rhythm of the
piece provided by the user. In the case of the first notes only,
the user starts from the notes presented by our system. Only
some notes to which it is possible to transition from these notes
are displayed. A video of our system and interactions can be
seen at https://youtu.be/SSlzdlO_v0Y.

Figure 4. Comparison of a piece created with our system
(above) and with the conventional piano roll type system
(bottom). These were both created by a 21 year-old student who
is inexperienced at composition.

composed on our system used a broad range of pitches and a
many variations of rhythm compared with the piano-roll type
system. This is thought to be due to the fact that an increased
number of options is available to the user because a variety
of notes is recommended.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We proposed a system to recommend how to make melodies, in
order to allow anyone with intention to create compositions. Our
system recommends a melody to match the style of the piece
that has been provided, using pitch transition and rhythm.
Compared to the piano-roll system, the piece composed with
this system used a wide pitch range and a many variations of
rhythm. In the future, we intend to use our system to compose
pieces of different styles, then investigate the differences
between these pieces, and whether it is possible for listeners to
distinguish them from pieces created by professional composers.

IMPLEMENTATION

Our system was built on a Microsoft Surface Pro 3, and is
operated using the Surface Pen. Composed pieces are output
from a USB Speaker. (Figure 3) The user interface is
displayed by embedding JavaScript in Cycling '74 Max and
calling OpenGL. The pitch transition database and rhythm
database were built by SQLite, and melody recommendation
is processed by calling data from each database from JavaScript.
Music data uses MIDI format data that is sold in the YAMAHA
music data shop (https://yamahamusicdata.jp/). MIDI
data is expanded by JavaScript, and recorded in each of the
databases. Melodies in the process of composition are stored
in the computer memory by JavaScript, and are played in
bach. Bach is an external object of Max. Our system uses the
Roland SOUND Canvas for iOS as a sound source.

REFERENCES

EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS

An easy comparison was carried out between a piece created
with our system and a piece created with the conventional
piano-roll type of composition system. The piano-roll
composition system used was Domino. Figure 4 shows a pair
of pieces that were composed in accordance with the same
accompaniment. Our system was provided with the melody
of this accompaniment piece. The song used was "Hana no
Nioi" by Mr.Children (2008). Mr.Children is one of the most
popular rock band in Japan. The composer of the pieces
shown in Figure 4 is a 21-year-old student who is inexperienced at composition. Comparing these pieces, the piece

1.

Cope, D. Machine Models of Music, MIR Press,
pp.403-425 (1992).

2.

Hiller, L. and Isaacson, L. Musical Composition with a
Highspeed Digital Computer, Journal of the Audio
Engineering Society, Vol.6, No.3, (1958), 154-160.

3.

KAOSSILATOR. http://www.korg.com/jp/products
/dj/kaossilator2s/, July. 2016.
Pachet, F. and Roy, P. Markov Constraints: Steerable
Generation of Markov Sequences, Constraints, Vol.16,
No.2, (2011), 148-172.

4.

138

5.

Pachet, F. The Continuator: Musical Interaction with
Style. Journal of New Music Research, (2003),
32(3):333-341.

6.

TENORI-ON. http://www.yamaha.com/design/tenori-on
/swf/?from=global_search&from=global_search, July. 2016.

