Uniformity Based Haptic Alert Network: A Framework for
Intuitive, Multi-Device Haptic Notifications
Salem Karani
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA 02139
skarani@mit.edu

Chaitanya Varanasi
Citigroup Inc.
New York, NY 10013
chaitanya.varanasi@citi.com

ABSTRACT

number of alerts begins to create a disruptive and less
meaningful experience.

We experience haptic feedback on a wide variety of devices
in the modern day, including cellphones, tablets, and
smartwatches. However haptic alerts can quickly become
disruptive rather than helpful to a user when multiple
devices are providing feedback simultaneously or
consecutively. Thus in this paper, we propose an
intercommunicating, turn-based local network between a
user's devices. This will allow a guaranteed minimal time
span between device alerts. Additionally, when multiple
devices provide a notification-based haptic alert, devices
often produce different feedback due to the varying
materials they are placed on. To address this, our
framework allows devices to self-regulate their levels of
haptic responses based on the material density of the
surface they are placed on. This allows the framework to
enforce a uniform level of haptic feedback across all the
surface-device combinations. Finally, we will also utilize
this common network to eliminate redundant alerts across
devices.

HAPTIC ALERT NETWORK

haptic alert; haptic feedback; intercommunicating;
distributed network; material haptic response

To address these problems, we have developed a novel,
self-regulating Haptic Alert Network (HAN) which aims to
repurpose standalone haptic devices into a new mesh
network of haptic devices acting as an actively selfmonitored, intercommunicating alert system. The
intercommunicating network has seen prior forms through a
zigbee-based system [5], and in prior sensor-based systems
[6]. However, our implementation is more integrated with a
full set of features rather than just global event notification
[7], and is not constrained to any single communication
protocol. HAN is a network of haptic devices connected to
allow meaningful vibrations, regardless of the surface they
are placed on or frequency of alerts. For the system to be
non-intrusive and eliminate redundant outputs, we describe
an architecture which provides guaranteed minimum
separation between alerts, and encourages a less disruptive
experience through the reduction of alerts and a uniform
level of vibration across all components. Therefore, the user
is not overwhelmed with triggered alerts and frequent
notifications.

INTRODUCTION

Haptic Equalization

Keywords

Haptic devices have existed and been significant since the
1970s, however we have only recently started utilizing the
full potential of haptics in computing with the Internet of
Things revolution. With the rising trend of interconnected
devices, technology has been increasingly adopting the use
of haptic technology to introduce a new medium of
notification for the user. The norm for a user to interact
with the device is to engage in a uniform, easy- tounderstand manner. Yet as number of devices and
applications providing haptic alerts increases, the sheer
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984769

Figure 1: Auditory Response after HAN self-adjustment for
uniform vibration levels across all types of tangent surfaces

In the real world, we interact with multiple surfaces
including wood, fabric, or granite. If HAN were to act as an
intercommunicating alert system for all devices within
some constraint, we have to acknowledge how haptic
devices will function on different surfaces with varying
densities and surface material properties. We base our
algorithm on prior work on identifying materials from

201

impact sound level [2,3,8]. To equalize the vibration
feedback among different surfaces, we created an
equalization algorithm to regulate amplitude and frequency
of the vibration motors. The equalization algorithm will
first perform a test vibration sample as a control for all the
devices in the network. With each vibration, the individual
device will measure the ambient sound from the vibration
activity. With each control vibration, the individual device
will measure the ambient sound, alpha, from the vibration
activity. The multiple alphas can all be placed on the x-axis
of a logarithmic scale. We use the y-axis of the scale to then
determine the average of all the alpha constants. Using the
alpha constant average, we can scale up or scale down the
power of each haptic device to an average, seen in Figure 1.

notification. Then for any subsequent notifications within
the experimentally set time window of 30 seconds, the
system will allow a notification to be broadcast only if the
hashmap does not already contain an object with the same
content. Every time a device enters the critical section and
broadcasts a notification, the map is cleared of all objects
older than 30 seconds. Thus the system continuously filters
for redundancy.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The HAN framework has shown to perform well in our
informal experiments. It successfully eliminated
simultaneous haptic alerts and cut down on the total number
of haptic alerts across all devices. The self- regulating
algorithm also performed well in adjusting the level of
haptic alerts for a uniform haptic response. Future efforts
will focus on further optimizing and enhancing the
framework. This can be done by supporting additional
inter-device communication protocols, and also by using
machine-learning for the alert filtering system.

The benefit of such an algorithm would be to ensure that
devices placed on surfaces with densities on either the very
low or very high end of the spectrum can still be perceived
as having a uniform level of haptic feedback by the user.
Turn-Based Notification System

REFERENCES

1. Leslie Lamport. 1978. Time, clocks, and the ordering of
events in a distributed system. Communications of the
ACM Commun. ACM 21, 7 (January 1978), 558–565.
2. Dinesh K. Pai, Roberta L. Klatzky. 2000. Perception of
shape and material from contact sounds. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
107, 5 (2000), 2817.
3. Bruno L. Giordano and Stephen Mcadams. 2006.
Material identification of real impact sounds: Effects of
size variation in steel, glass, wood, and plexiglass plates.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 119, 2 (2006), 1171.

Figure 2: Haptic alert frequency and timing across user’s
devices with HAN

Through work built upon by Lamport, Ricart, and Agrawala
[1,4], we intend to have a network structure between all of a
user’s devices, over the Bluetooth protocol. This network
will regulate a more intuitive, naturally paced sequence of
haptic notifications when simultaneous notifications occur.
Using the Ricart-Agrawala Distributed Mutual Exclusion
Algorithm, each device submits a request to the shared
network when it desires to send a haptic notification. It is
guaranteed to only receive permission for the critical
section if there is no other device in the critical section.
Once a device has access to the critical section, it allows the
haptic notification to be broadcast. This will completely
disallow simultaneous haptic alerts across a user’s devices.
Our informal experiments show this to present a less
frenetic pace of alerts to a user.

4. Glenn Ricart and Ashok K. Agrawala. 1981. An optimal
algorithm for mutual exclusion in computer networks.
Communications of the ACM Commun. ACM 24, 1
(January 1981), 9–17.
5. Neeraja T.p., Sivraj P., and Sasi K.k. 2015. Sensor
Based Communication Network for WACS with DNP3.
Procedia Technology 21 (2015), 76–81.
6. Salman Taherian and Jean Bacon. 2007. State-Filters for
Enhanced Filtering in Sensor-Based Publish/Subscribe
Systems. 2007 International Conference on Mobile
Data Management (2007).
7. L.f. Cabrera, M.b. Jones, and M. Theimer. Herald:
achieving a global event notification service.
Proceedings Eighth Workshop on Hot Topics in
Operating Systems.

Filtering Redundant Notifications

Using the inter-device network we were able to reduce the
amount of redundant and simultaneous haptic notifications.
Every time a device sends a notification, we register a small
amount of metadata into a shared hashmap. The metadata
contains time of occurrence and the origin of the

8. J. Sinapov, V. Sukhoy, R. Sahai. 2011. Vibrotactile
Recognition and Categorization of Surfaces by a
Humanoid Robot. IEEE Trans. Robot. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics 27, 3 (2011), 488–497.

202

