Hilbert Curves: A Tool for Resolution
Independent Haptic Texture
William Frier
University of Sussex
Brighton, UK
w.frier@sussex.ac.uk

Kyoungwon Seo
Hanyang University
Seoul, Korea
cseo@hanyang.ac.kr

ABSTRACT

Sriram Subramanian
University of Sussex
Brighton, UK
sriram@sussex.ac.uk

Haptic systems usually stimulate the kinesthetic aspects of
the sense of touch, i.e. force feedback systems. But more
and more devices aim to stimulate the cutaneous part of the
sense of touch to reproduce more complex tactile
sensations. To do so, they stimulate one’s fingertip in
different locations, usually in the fashion of a matrix
pattern. In this paper we investigate the new possibilities
that are offered by such a framework and present an
ongoing project that investigates the benefits of Hilbert
curves to display resolution independent mid-air haptic
textures in comparison with other implementation
approaches.

Such devices actually produce what one could call a “haptic
frame” which is analogous to an image frame from a video.
For historical reason (in CRT displays) an image frame is
commonly refreshed using a raster scanning technique.
However, one could come up with plenty of different
methods to refresh a frame. Considering the possibilities of
alternative techniques, can one find a method that provides
significant benefit over raster scanning? In light of the huge
resolution differences between devices, a refresh method
that could be used across devices, without additional
computation and that gives consistent feeling is valuable.
Here we propose a novel approach to address the haptic
frame-refreshing problem using Hilbert curves.

Author Keywords

TEXTURE

Mid-air haptic; texture; Hilbert curves; resolution;
rendering;

When fingertips rub a textured surface, surface asperities at
a macro and micro-level come to deform the fingertip skin
surface. These deformations are then coded through
mechanoreceptors embedded underneath the skin.
Therefore, the spatial information one extracts is not a
single frequency component but rather the ratio of all the
frequency components that compose the texture signal [11].
However, textures are not only felt actively (i.e, by the
finger moving across a static surface), but also passively
(say when a texture is moved under static finger); and in
both cases, the texture perception is similar [6]. This
suggests that temporal frequency also conveys texture
sensation [7]. Actually, that is supported by a study
showing that vibrating a textured surface can actually alter
its perceived roughness [1].

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

Texture is an important haptic property, which helps to
discriminate objects. For example, texture helps one to
differentiate wood from laminate. However, it’s not the
amount of force exerted on the fingertip that codes for the
texture, but all the macro and micro-irregularities that are
present at the contact between the skin and the textured
surface [5]. Furthermore, the human sense of touch can
identify elements as small as 10nm amplitude [9].
Consequently, researchers have developed new haptic
systems that can stimulate the fingertip in different ways.
Some systems take the form of pin-arrays and can either
apply normal force [4] or shear force [10]. Another
approach uses mid-air haptic devices that can either
produce multi-point stimulation [2] or one fast moving
point stimulation [8].

THE CHOICE OF HILBERT CURVES

More often than not, haptic points need to be addressed one
at a time. Therefore, the update procedure can be seen as a
one-dimensional process where points are presented in a
specific and predefined order. The raster scanning method
is often preferred due to its simplicity of implementation
and historical use in displays. In some alternatives, a
method that sweeps back and forth the display in a
horizontal fashion can be chosen, due to its continuous
property that limits explored distance. Additionally, there is
a whole family of curves referred as space-filling curves
that can scan through the entire frame in a continuous
manner. In other words, these curves map a onedimensional signal (the refresh order) to a two dimensional
space (the frame).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984774

211

the perceptual time constraints on the refresh frame rate?
To what extent does the resolution gap affect the perceived
texture? We aim to address these questions through
psychophysical experiments in the near future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper is based on work supported by Ultrahaptics
Limited.

Figure 1–Scanning Methods: Horizontal sweep (left) Hilbert Curve (right).

But the risk is that when the display resolution changes, the
refresh method used won’t preserve the information
locality. The locality preservation is the fact that a
particular sample of a one-dimension signal will always
have the same location in the two-dimension space. In other
words, consider a normalized one-dimensional coordinate
that parameterizes the curve. One sample of that signal will
map to approximately the same position in the twodimensional space whatever the resolution used. This
condition is violated for horizontal sweep and raster scan
refresh methods.

REFERENCES

1. Asano, S., Okamoto, S., Matsuura, Y. & Yamada, Y.
(2014) Toward quality texture display: vibrotactile
stimuli to modify material roughness sensations. In
Advanced Robotics (pp. 1079-89)
2. Carter, T., Seah, S. A., Long, B., Drinkwater, B., &
Subramanian, S. (2013). UltraHaptics: multi-point midair haptic feedback for touch surfaces. In Proceedings of
UIST’13 (pp. 505-514). ACM.
3. J. Romano, T. Yoshioka, and K. Kuchenbecker (2010)
Automatic filter design for synthesis of haptic textures
from recorded acceleration data. In ICRA (pp. 1815–21).
4. Killebrew, J., Bensmaïa, S., Dammann, J., Denchev, P.,
Hsiao, S., Craig, J., & Johnson, K. (2007). A dense array
stimulator to generate arbitrary spatio-temporal tactile
stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, (pp. 62–74).
5. Lederman, S (1974) Tactile roughness of grooved
surfaces: The touching process and effects of macroand microsurface structure. Perception & Psychophysics
6. Lederman, S (1981) The Perception of surface
roughness by active and passive touch. In Bulletin f the
Psychonomic Society.
7. Obrist, M., Seah, S. A., & Subramanian, S. (2013,
April). Talking about tactile experiences.
In Proceedings of CHI’13(pp. 1659-1668). ACM.
8. Ochiai, Y., Kumagai, K., Hoshi, T., et al. (2015) Fairy
Lights in Femtoseconds: Aerial and Volumetric
Graphics Rendered by Focused Femtosecond Laser
Combined with Computational Holographic Fields. In
Proceeding of SIGGRAPH’15. ACM
9. Skedung L., Arvidsson M., Chung J., Stafford C.,
Berglund B., Rutland M. (2013) Feeling Small:
Exploring the Tactile Perception Limits. In Nature:
Scientific Report.
10. Wang Q., Hayward V. (2006) Compact, Portable,
Modular, High-performance, Distributed Tactile
Transducer Device Based on Lateral Skin Deformation.
In Symposium on Haptic Interfaces For Virtual
Environment And Teleoperator Systems. IEEE
11. Weber, A., Saal, H., Lieber, J. et al. (2013) Spatial and
temporal codes mediate the tactile perception of natural
textures. In Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America (pp. 17107-12)

But among the space-filling curves, a specific sub-category
called pseudo-Hilbert curves does not suffer from that
issue. The pseudo-Hilbert curves are a family of curves that
discretize a two-dimensional space into 2n subdivisions.
Each curve is identified through its order, which is n in the
case of a curve that divides the space into 2n subdivisions In
the case of a tactile display, the 2n divisions could be
considered as the “pixel” of the haptic frame. Regardless of
the pseudo-Hilbert curve order, a specific sample from the
one-dimensional representation of the pseudo-Hilbert curve
will have relatively the same position in its corresponding
two-dimension representation. Consequently, we propose to
use pseudo-Hilbert curves to refresh a haptic frame.
First, an initial pseudo-Hilbert curve can be used to
transform the two-dimensional data set into a onedimension signal, then the one-dimension signal can be
downsampled to obtain a lower order pseudo-Hilbert curve
that can dynamically match the device resolution and
display the texture while preserving locality..
Secondly, since texture can be tuned through signal
processing, the one-dimensional representation of the
pseudo-Hilbert curve will be faster to process than the twodimensional frame. Indeed, if using a one-dimensional
signal, a simple low pass-filter will shift the frequency
distribution to the low frequency, which will result into a
rougher texture. And on the other hand, a high-pass filter
will result into a smoother texture. One can thus imagine an
implementation, with only one texture data set, represented
as a pseudo-Hilbert curve, kept in memory and adjusted
through one-dimension signal processing.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Here we propose a method to render resolution independent
mid-air haptic textures using Hilbert curves. However, does
this new method affect the perceptual sensation? What are

212

