NeverMind: Using Augmented Reality for Memorization
Oscar Rosello
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St
Cambridge, MA
rosello@mit.edu

Marc Exposito
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St
Cambridge, MA
exposito@media.mit.edu

ABSTRACT

Pattie Maes
MIT Media Lab
75 Amherst St
Cambridge, MA
pattie@media.mit.edu

imagining a route in the mental architectural space and
placing mental symbols along that route. When recalling
the sequence, you need to revisit that route mentally to
recall the concepts.

NeverMind is an interface and application designed to
support human memory. We combine the memory palace
memorization method with augmented reality technology to
create a tool to help anyone memorize more effectively.
Preliminary experiments show that content memorized with
NeverMind remains longer in memory compared to general
memorization techniques. With this project, we hope to
make the memory palace method accessible to novices and
demonstrate one way augmented reality can support
learning.

However, getting started with the memory palace method
can be a difficult and demanding cognitive task. The
method involves imagining a space vividly in your mind,
which can be challenging for novices. To address this
problem, we propose to use reality as the memory palace.
We believe that using routes and locations that the user has
physically experienced and is familiar with eases the use of
the method. We use augmented reality technology to
offload the mental effort involved in imagining and
associating symbols and use real scenes instead.

Author Keywords

Memory augmentation; memory palace; method of loci;
augmented reality; educational interfaces.

At first, it might seem a counterintuitive strategy since you
need to remember both a place and the actual content you
want to memorize, but, in fact, the opposite is true. Current
neurological research has proven spatial navigation and
memory both engage the same part of the brain, the
hippocampus. Brain scans of “superior memorizers”, 90%
of whom use the memory palace method, have shown that it
involves activation of regions of the brain involved in
spatial awareness, such as the medial parietal cortex,
retrosplenial cortex, and the right posterior hippocampus
[2]. The memory palace method takes advantage of this fact
to facilitate encoding, storing and retrieval of information.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m
INTRODUCTION

The memory palace or method of loci is an ancient Greek
method that can be used to memorize (almost) anything. It
is used for tasks such as remembering exam material,
languages, presentations, speeches and more. Many
memory athletes, including USA memory champion Joshua
Foer, claim to use this method [1].
The memory palace method works as follows. Given a
concept or word you want to memorize, you come up with a
visual mental symbol for this concept that will help you
remember it by association. Then, take this imaginary
image and mentally place it in an architectural scene.
Finally, to recall your concept, you imagine the scene you
mentally created and the concept you want to remember
will effortlessly emerge.

NEVERMIND INTERFACE

NeverMind is an Augmented Reality system that enables a
user to use the spaces they are familiar with to build their
own memory palace and memorize lists of items.

Typically, the memory palace method is used to memorize
a series of items. In such cases the method involves
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984776

Figure 1. The NeverMind app (left) handles user interaction,
the headset (middle) displays the information, the user sees the
content at their current location (right).

The interface is divided into two parts: an iPhone app that
handles user interaction and an Epson Moverio BT-200
augmented reality headset for displaying graphical content.
A program that runs in the Unity3D video game engine is

215

responsible for receiving the images from the iPhone app
and displaying them on the augmented reality glasses.

in recall were observed after 24-hours (NeverMind:
Avg.=0.96, SD=0.07; Paper: Avg.=0.43; SD=0.33),
suggesting that that the content studied with the NeverMind
interface is remembered for longer than with a traditional
study method. 7 days after the task the content recall rate
with NeverMind hold similar values to the 24-hour task
(NeverMind: Avg.=0.96, SD=0.09; Paper: Avg.=0.35;
SD=0.26). When questioned about the two methods, users
claimed that studying with the NeverMind interface was
much more enjoyable (71%) or more enjoyable (29%) and
effortless compared to the paper-based study method.

The NeverMind app has two modes, setup and train. The
setup mode lets the user define a route and populate the
locations with the graphical content that will help them
memorize. When setting up the routes, users select images
from Google image search or their phone’s camera that will
help them retrieve the concept they intend to remember. In
train mode, the user sees the images on the AR headset
when they reach the location they are associated with.
EXPERIMENTS

USAGE SCENARIOS

We have run a preliminary experiment to test the
NeverMind interface with 14 subjects. Participants were all
college student volunteers from different educational
backgrounds. Before starting the experimental task, 64% of
the participants stated in a survey they had average or
below average memory.

Our motivation is to change the way students memorize.
Students spend a lot of time memorizing based on
repetition. This paper shows that there are more effective
study methods that are in line with the way our brain stores
information. We see potential uses in education, as a
method to bootstrap knowledge as a starting point before
making associations and inferences that are characteristic of
higher levels of understanding. The system could be used,
for example, for medical school students to facilitate
learning the branches of the trigeminal nerve.

Each participant performed two memorization tasks, of 10
items each, one using a printed list of items and another one
using NeverMind. We tested our subjects on two similar
lists of items. For the list of 10 Super Bowl champions from
1967 to 1976 for the NeverMind-based task and the
champions from 1977 to 1986 for the paper-based task. We
verified that the subjects had no previous knowledge of the
content they were tested on before running the experiment.

RELATED WORK

Previous work dedicated to recreating a virtual memory
palace to enhance human memory involve either a
computer simulation model or virtual reality [3][4].
Because NeverMind uses reality, the generation of a 3D
memory palace is not necessary. Also, users can train on
any route they are familiar with.
CONCLUSIONS

We have proposed a study model to help users master
memory based on pairing spatial navigation and memory.
We have designed NeverMind, a learning interface
prototype to make memorization enjoyable and effective.
With this project, we have provided an interface to make
the memory palace method accessible to the general user.

Figure 2. Recall accuracy for the experiment task using
NeverMind compared to the paper based task.

For the paper-based task, subjects were handed a printed list
of 10 items and were told to memorize the content. For the
NeverMind-based task, we used a 200-meter route all
participants were familiar with. For verification purposes,
we showed a map with the specific route we would take
during the memorization task. Next, we preloaded the
interface´s images for the users. For example, we used a
picture of a man on a horse to represent the Dallas
Cowboys, a picture of an airplane to represent the Houston
Jets and so on. Next, the subjects walked through the route,
visualizing in AR the content NeverMind displays at each
location. Then we tested their ability to recall the content
memorized in the tasks in three different time spans, after 2
minutes, after 24 hours and after 7 days.

REFERENCES

1. Foer, J. Moonwalking with Einstein: The Art and
Science of Remembering Everything. Penguin Books
(2012).
2. Maguire, E.A. et al. Routes to Remembering: The
Brains behind Superior Memory. Nature Neuroscience
6,1 (2002), 90–95.
3. Brooks, B.M., F.D. Rose. The Use of Virtual Reality in
Memory Rehabilitation: Current Findings and Future
Directions. NeuroRehabilitation 18 ,2 (2003), 147–157.
4. Legge, E.L.G et al. Building a Memory Palace in
Minutes: Equivalent Memory Performance Using
Virtual versus Conventional Environments with the
Method of Loci. Acta Psychologica 141,3 (2012), 380–
90.

Results show that recall rate 2 minutes after each task has
similar values (NeverMind: Avg.=0.97, SD=0.06; Paper:
Avg.=0.96; SD=0.07). However, significant improvements

216

