MagTacS: Delivering Tactile Sensation over an Object
Hyung-Sik Kim1, Seong-Young Gim1, Woo-Ram Kim1, Mi-Hyun Choi1, Seungmoon Choi2,
Soon-Cheol Chung1,*
1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, BK21+ Research Institute of Biomedical Engineering,
College of Biomedical & Health Science, Konkuk University, Chungju, South Korea
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang, South Korea
{hskim98}@kku.ac.kr, {butsmy, kimwooram1}@naver.com, {mhchoi0311}@gmail.com,
{choism}@postech.ac.kr, {scchung}@kku.ac.kr
transducers, and occurrence of noise. Recently, a method
that presents tactile sensation using laser has been
developed [4]. This method radiates pulsed laser directly on
the material attached on the skin surface for the human
body to sense stress waves that are generated by
thermoelastic effect as tactile sensation.

ABSTRACT

A system that can deliver tactile sensation despite an object
existing between an actuator and human was developed.
This system composed of a control part, power part, output
part, and coil. The control part controls the overall system
using a microcontroller. The power part generates electric
current to create a magnetic field. The output part delivers
high energies to the coil. The coil generates a time-varying
magnetic field to induce current flow within the body.
Through the tactile sensation recognition test, delivery of
tactile sensation was confirmed in the air even an object
existed between actuator and human skin.

However, these noncontact-type tactile sensation-presenting
methods have a common disadvantage that delivery of
tactile sensation is difficult or impossible if an object is in
between the actuator and human. In this study, a technique
was developed which can present tactile sensation using
time-varying magnetic field that is generated from electric
coil despite an existing object.

Author Keywords

Tactile sensation; time-varying magnetic field; magnetic
stimulation

BASIC
PRINCIPLE
STIMULATOR

OF

MAGNETIC

TACTILE

All human body activities are controlled by electrical or
chemical reactions. These reactions occur inside the human
body, but similar results can be artificially generated
outside the body by inducing equivalent or similar reactions.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation: User
interfaces: Haptic I/O.

Researches that induce tactile sensation by directly
applying electric current to skin are being performed. On
the contrary, the method proposed in this study uses an
electric coil that is separated in a certain distance from the
human skin to generate time-varying magnetic field. This
magnetic field make a current flow by inducing electric
field within the human body. This current can elicit a tactile
sensation by activating nerve cells or mechanoreceptors of
the skin. The schematic diagram of magnetically induced
tactile sensation is shown in Fig. 1.

INTRODUCTION

Contact-type methods that require physical contact between
the actuator and skin are mainly used in haptic fields to
present tactile sensation. Mechanical methods such as DC
motor, servo motor, piezoelement, and von-frey filament,
electrical methods using electrostatic or electric stimulation,
and thermal methods using peltier element and foil are
currently used to present three types of tactile sensation
which are vibration, pressure, and thermal sensation [1].
However, the contact-type method can fundamentally
present tactile sensation only when skin is contacted in
which it is insufficient to be used in fields that emphasize
user experience (UX) such as virtual or augmented reality
and 3D or 4D interaction systems. Therefore, devices that
present noncontact-type tactile sensation with methods
using focused ultrasound and air-spray have been
developed to improve the drawbacks of contact manner
[2,3]. However, these methods have limitations such as
short traveling distance, requirement of several ultrasound

DEVELOPMENT OF MAGNETIC TACTILE STIMULATOR

The actual image of the magnetic field based tactile
stimulator is shown in Fig. 2.
The developed system is composed of 4 parts including the
control part, power part, output part, and coil part. The
control part controls operation of the total system using a
microcontroller. The power part generates high DC (direct
current) voltage to generate magnetic field and the energy is
stored in the capacitor. The output part delivers high
voltage and current to the coil in short time by using a
silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR). The coil was made in a
disk shape by winding copper wire and the size is 13 cm in
diameter. The size of the total system without the coil is 60
x 30 x 20 cm3 (W x L x H).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985698

41

cm. The waveform of the time-varying magnetic field
measured by the searching coil at hand position is shown in
Fig. 3 (g).
CONCLUSIONS

A magnetic field based tactile sensation presenting
technique was developed in this study. Through comparison
with existing tactile stimulator systems, it was confirmed
that tactile sensation could be presented in air and delivery
of tactile sensation was possible even with an object in
between the actuator and body. Research on various tactile
sensation stimulations such as vibration and pressure
sensation is additionally required in the future by
controlling parameters such as strength, frequency, and
stimulation time of magnetic field.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of tactile sensation induced by
magnetic field.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported by the Pioneer Research
Center Program through the National Research Foundation
of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future
Planning (2011-0027920).
REFERENCES

1. Chouvardas, V.G., Miliou, A.N., and Hatalis, M.K.,
Tactile displays: Overview and recent advances.
Displays 29, (2008), 185-194.
2. Gwilliam, J.C., Bianchi, M., Su, L.K., and Okamura,
A.M. Characterization and psychophysical studies of an
air-jet lump display. IEEE Transactions on Haptics 6, 2
(2013), 156-166.
3. Hasegawa, K., and Shinoda, H. Aerial display of
vibrotactile sensation with high spatial-temporal
resolution using large-aperture airborne ultrasound
phased array. In Proceedings of WHC 2013, ACM Press
(2013), 31-36.

Figure 2. Overall configuration of Magnetic Tactile Stimulator
TESTING THE TACTILE SENSATION USING MagTacS

Using the developed system, tactile sensation recognition
test was conducted according to the type of object (lumber,
corrugated cardboard, paper box, acryl panel, and book)
that was placed in between the coil stimulator and hand (Fig.
3). The test subject and coil were blocked with a black
curtain to block visual information. Delivery of tactile
sensation was checked by electrical sensation in the normal
direction of the coil simulator separated by distance of 10

4. Jun, J.H., Park, J.R., Kim, S.P., Bae, Y.M., Park, J.Y.,
Kim, H.S., Choi, S., Jung, S.J., Park, S.H., Yeom, D.I.,
Jung, G.I., Kim, J.S., and Chung, S.C. Laser-induced
thermoelastic effects can evoke tactile sensations.
Scientific Reports 5, (2015), 11016.

Figure 3. Tactile sensation delivery test according to type of object (a: air, b: wood, c: corrugated cardboard, d:
paper box, e: acryl panel, f: book) and time-varying magnetic field measured at hand position (g)

42

