3D Printed Physical Interfaces that
can Extend Touch Devices
Kunihiro Kato
Meiji University
Nakano, Tokyo, Japan
kkunihir@meiji.ac.jp

Homei Miyashita
Meiji University
Nakano, Tokyo, Japan
homei@homei.com
at arbitrary locations on an XY plane. The user can input
not only tap and scroll operations but also a variety of gestures using our interface simply by connecting it to the touch
panel. In addition, our technique can be fabricated using an
FDM-based 3D printer with conductive and non-conductive
PLA materials. This allows the user to easily prototype touch
extension interfaces.

ABSTRACT

We propose a method to create a physical interface that allows touch input to be transferred from an external surface
attached to a touch panel. Our technique prints a grid having
multiple conductive points using an FDM-based 3D printer.
When the user touches the conductive points, touch input is
generated. This allows the user to control the touch input at
arbitrary locations on an XY plane. By arranging the structure
of the conductive wiring inside a physical object, a variety of
interfaces can be realized.
Author Keywords

Physical interface; 3D printer; Capacitive touch panel.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
User Interfaces Input Devices and Strategies.
INTRODUCTION

In recent years, the variety of devices with a capacitive touch
panel, such as smartphones and tablets, has increased significantly. These devices allow users to perform more instinctive
operations by touching the display with their finger. Previous
studies have employed a variety of approaches relation to the
touch interfaces, such as a tangible user interface using on
the touch panel [1, 3] and a method for extend touch interface with physical devices [2, 5]. A method to realize these
interfaces using on a capacitive touch panel with conductive
materials, is one of the popular methodology. The user also
fabricates a prototype interface using this method very easy
and low-cost. However, the most of the interfaces using this
method can generate touch inputs at specific locations contiguous with conductive surface.

Figure 1. Applications. (a) Generating touch input using conductive
points; (b) Side touch interface; (c) The touch zoom interface; (d) Transforming the touch movement.

PROPOSED METHOD

The proposed physical interface comprises two portions: the
input portion that the user directly touches and the output
portion, which is attached to the area that generates touch
events. Each portion has a grid layout having multiple conductive points; these points are connected to either side portion’s points via an inside physical interface. When a portion of the conductive points is simultaneously touched by a
finger, it generates a change in the capacitance sufficient to
trigger touch recognition. This also allows the user to input
continuous touch input, such as scroll operations. When the
user slides their finger, a portion of the conductive points will
be activated in a given order. This allows the touch panel to
recognize the uninterrupted touch input. The fundamental approach for this method is based on the technique proposed by
ZebraWidgets and ExtensionSticker [1, 2]. Our method can
recognize touch interactions at arbitrary locations on an XY
plane using a grid layout of multiple conductive points.

In this study, we propose a touch extension physical interface that can generate touch input at an arbitrary location on
a surface. Our technique generates touch input by activating a grid-layout of multiple conductive points (Figure 1a).
When the user touches these conductive points, touch input
is generated. This allows the user to control the touch input

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985700

We fabricated a physical interface that has a grid layout of
multiple conductive parts using an FDM-based 3D printer
with dual print-extruders (BS01 Dual ABS/PLA Model1,
Bonsai Lab.Inc.). Grid layout of multiple conductive parts
are exposed on the top and bottom face of the interface.

47

Thus, this physical interface has implanted multiple conductive poles implanted structure. Our interfaces were printed
using grapheme-based conductive PLA (Graphene 3D Lab.,
volume resistance: 0.6 Ω-cm) and non-conductive PLA materials. At this time, it is necessary for each conductive
part to be independent and to not contact other conductive
parts. CleanColor reported that the printing quality can be
decayed when using an FDM-based 3D printer having dual
print-extruders [4]. Due to material smears from the unilateral print head in the idle process, it is possible for conductive parts to come into contact with each other. Therefore,
it is necessary to further develop the printing of a physical
interface to improve the printing quality.

We observed that the edge of the conductive part had spread
laterally. This was attributed to the filament smears caused
by over extruded materials from the print head. It is presumably the cause of the contact between adjacent conductive
parts. Then, we measured the resistance between the conductive parts after cutting 1.0 mm from both edges of the plate.
As the result, the 0.8 mm interval conductive parts achieved
over 98 % for 0.8 mm and 1.6 mm width, and the 1.6 mm
width conductive parts achieved 100 % for 0.8 mm and 1.6
mm width. Therefore, by rasping the face grid-layout conductive points, and laundering the filament smears, the user can
print the physical interface with considerable reliability. In
addition, it is necessary that the grid-layout conductive points
remain in complete contact with the touch panel. Moreover,
rasping the face of the proposed physical interfaces is also an
acceptable approach.

In this study, we print a physical interface sideways as conductive poles inside the object are lain on a layer (Figure 2
Right). Therefore, conductive material is added only at the
specific conductive points to stand in a low. In addition,
a non-conductive material layer is printed after conductive
parts for one line have been printed. Thus, this approach can
reduce printing errors, such as those reported by CleanColor.
Based on these techniques, we conducted a reliability experiment to evaluate the print quality. We printed a number of
striped patterned plates (Figure 2 Left). This plate is comparable with conductive points placed in a row of conductive
points with grid-layout. As mentioned above, the probability
of connecting the conductive materials along the vertical direction is very low. Therefore, here we focused on the contact
of the each conductive part along the side-by-side direction.

APPLICATIONS

Our interface can implement a variety of touch interfaces that
can extend touch devices by shaping the structure of the conductive wiring inside a physical object. As shown in Figure
1b, bending the direction of a wire by 90 ° allows the user
to install touch interfaces on the sides of devices. This allows the user to input a variety of touch operations, such as
tap, scroll, and swipe in all directions, as well as rotation operations, using only a single object. This example can also
be applied to a cardboard head-mounted display (HMD). Our
method can make a cardboard HMD with a trackpad, such as
the Samsung GearVR, possible at a low cost.
As shown in Figure 1c, by changing the printed interval of the
input and output portions of the conductive points, we can
create a touch zooming interface that can change the speed
of the touch controls between the user’s touch operation and
touch event generated on the touch panel. This means the
touch zooming interface can allow touch devices to generate
finer movement touch inputs than the user’s touch operations.
In general, pinch operations are performed when the user
draws small figures on touch-panel devices, such as smartphones. Our method will allow touch operations on smaller
touch-panel devices, such as smartwatches.
In general, touch input can be generated at the output portion with the same movement as the user’s touch operations
on the input portion, as shown in previous sections. Breaking
certain portions allows the interface to generate touch input at
certain areas of the output portion. In addition, arranging the
location of the input portion in a straight line and changing
the form of the wiring inside the physical interface allows the
user to input a unique pattern of touch operations using a simple straight-line scroll operation (Figure 1d). We can record
the user’s touch operation and fabricate a physical interface
that can generate the same movement touch operations in the
output portion. Applying this to a pattern lock, such as the
Android OS, the user can fabricate an interface that can unlock the smartphone by scrolling or swiping on the face of a
physical object.

Figure 2. Left: Striped pattern plates. This plate is comparable with
conductive points to stand in a row of grid-layout conductive points;
Right: Printing Process.

We measured the resistance between successive conductive
parts by using a multimeter that can measure resistances up
to 20 MΩ. A number of multimeter measurements were recognized as errors, and the authenticity rate was recorded.
The experiment was conducted for conductive striped pattern
plates having different combinations of point width (0.8 mm
and 1.6 mm) and point interval (0.8 mm and 1.6 mm).
We printed 10 striped pattern plates with 10 conductive parts
each with various combinations of width and interval. Based
on the experimental results, the 0.8 mm interval conductive
parts achieved over 75 % for 0.8 mm and 1.6 mm width, and
the 1.6 mm width conductive parts achieved over 96 % for 0.8
mm and 1.6 mm width. The experimental results show that
the authenticity rate dropped as the interval grew narrower.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by COI, JST.

48

Controls on Mobile Devices. In Proc. of CHI EA 2011,
pp.1351-1356.

REFERENCES

1. Chun, L., Muller, S., Roudaut, A. and Baudisch, P.
CapStones and ZebraWidgets: Sensing Stacks of
Building Blocks, Dials and Sliders on Capacitive Touch
Screens. In Proc. of CHI 2012, pp.2189-2192.
2. Kato, K. and Miyashita, H. ExtensionSticker: A Proposal
for A Striped Pattern Sticker to Extend Touch Interfaces
and its Assessment. In Proc. of CHI 2015, pp.1851-1854.
3. Kratz, S., Westermann, T., Rohs, M. and Essl, G.
CapWidgets: Tangible Widgets versus Multi-Touch

4. Hergel, J. and Lefebvre, S. Clean color: Improving
multi-filament 3D prints. Journal of Computer Graphics
Forum, volume 33 Issue 2(2014), pp.469-478.
5. Yu, N-H., Tsai, S-S., Hsiao, I-C., Tsai, D-J., Lee, M-H.,
Chen, M. and Hung, Y-P. Clip-on Gadgets: Expanding
Multi-touch Interaction Area with Unpowered Tactile
Controls. In Proc. of UIST 2011, pp.367-372.

49

