The UIST Video Browser: Creating Shareable Playlists of
Video Previews
Carla F. Griggio

Nam Giang

Germán Leiva

Wendy E. Mackay

carla.griggio@inria.fr n.gianghan@gmail.com german.leiva@inria.fr wendy.mackay@inria.fr
Inria; Univ Paris-Sud & cnrs (lri); Université Paris-Saclay
F-91405 Orsay, France
Video previews can greatly boost the impact of our HCI conferences, but we still lack the tools for realizing their full potential. Although UIST video previews are listed on ACM’s
Youtube channel, they are completely disassociated from the
conference program. If an attendee likes a video preview, she
must manually search for it on the conference schedule to
know which session to attend. Confer[2] lets the user search
the conference and build a personal schedule, but only shows
text information about each program event. The UIST website and mobile app focus on exploring the program schedule:
users can see the video preview of each presentation, add papers to their “reading list” and save them to their personal
schedule. We believe that video previews can be useful beyond scheduling, and we want to enable different audiences
to appropriate them for different purposes.

ABSTRACT

We introduce the UIST Video Browser which provides a rapid
overview of the UIST 30-second video previews, based on the
conference schedule. Attendees can see an overview of upcoming talks, search by topic, and create personalized, shareable video playlists that capture the most interesting or relevant papers.
Author Keywords

Video previews; Personalized video playlists.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.1. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Multimedia Information Systems

We present the UIST Video Browser, a web application that
lets users create and share personal playlists of video previews while navigating the conference program. Our demo
brings the UIST Video Browser “into the wild”, inviting
UIST attendees to create and share their own playlists of the
conference program. Attendees are able to create their own
playlists at our booth, and we discuss different ideas to inspire
them, such as playlists of their favorite demos, of the best
talks they already attended, or just plan the upcoming session. Exhibiting the UIST Video Browser at the conference
also helps us reach audiences that can take advantage of the
video previews beyond the conference: a university professor
may have a “Making Music”-themed playlist with videos to
show in her Creative Design course; a digital journalist may
create a playlist on “3d printing applications” to illustrate an
article; and an industry practitioner may present a playlist to
her team after the conference to show relevant technologies
for their current project.

INTRODUCTION

In 2013, the CHI conference replaced “CHI Madness”–a set
of 30-second live summaries of each talk–with 30-second
video previews[1]. Video previews offer attendees quick
overview of the upcoming talks, to help them plan their day,
and serve as permanent video abstracts of each talk. Because
video previews are displayed with each paper’s abstract, in
front of the ACM Digital Library paywall, they offer a convenient way to share conference content within and beyond the
research community.
Our goal is to extend the benefits of the video previews
beyond helping conference attendees plan their schedules.
For example, Ph.D. students can create customized video
playlists related to their thesis topics; researchers can share
their favorite contributions with their labmates when they return from the conference; and professors can show students
the most recent, cutting-edge research on a particular topic.
These videos can also support non-research professionals:
journalists can report on highlights from the conference that
they communicate to the general public and industry professionals can use them to contact researchers about innovative
solutions or potential startups.

THE UIST VIDEO BROWSER

The UIST Video Browser highlights the video previews,
inviting users to visually explore the program and play the
videos that catch their eye. A detailed view of the conference program (Figure 1-a) lists all the sessions as small collections of video thumbnails that users can add to their own
playlists. The interactive program overview on the right (Figure 1-b) shows a high-level representation of the program
schedule and allows users to quickly jump among sessions.
This schedule-like layout provides the video previews with
temporal context, supporting situations where users might
prefer finding a video by navigating the program over a keyword search, e.g. a student volunteer wants an overview of

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985703

59

Figure 1. The UIST Video Browser helps users create their own playlists in the context of the conference schedule1 : a) The detailed view of the
conference program displays sessions as small collections of video previews; b) The interactive program overview shows an abstracted version of the
full program for quickly navigating through sessions; and c) The selected playlist is always visible on the top of the screen. d) A closeup of the interactive
program overview highlighting the selected playlist in orange and search results with a black border.

the talks starting after his shift on Monday afternoon; the presenting author of a paper wants a preview of the other talks
in his session; and after the conference, a researcher wants to
find the video of a presentation she attended by chance just
before the closing keynote.

labmates that want to recommend talks to each other. We encourage UIST attendees to become “conference curators” in
social media channels and share their own highlights on the
conference.
CONCLUSION

The top section of the screen features the playlists created
by the user (Figure 1-c). Users can rearrange, delete and
add video previews to the selected playlist. The interactive
program overview displays the selected playlist by highlighting its video previews in orange, so users can detect gaps in
their schedules or overlapping talks (Figure 1-d). The detailed view of the conference program highlights the video
previews of the selected playlist in the same way, helping
users find other relevant videos within the sessions present
in their playlists.

We present the UIST Video Browser, a web application that
invites attendees to create and share their own playlists of
UIST video previews. Users can skim through all the video
previews organized in program sessions, or search for specific keywords. An interactive program overview visualizes
the created playlists and search results to help users browse
the video previews supported by the conference schedule. We
expect users to create personal playlists that go beyond planning their conference, and participate as “conference curators” who share their own playlists with their colleagues and
the broader HCI community.

Users can also search for specific terms if they have a welldefined idea of what they are looking for. The UIST Video
Browser highlights search results with a thick black border
on the interactive program overview (Figure 1-b) and the detailed view of the conference program (Figure 1-a). By highlighting the results on the conference program instead of filtering the video previews that matched the search, users can
compare the search results with the video previews in the selected playlist and discover other relevant talks around them.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Hanna Schneider and Víctor Valle Juarranz for their
early contributions to this project, and Justin Matejka and
Stéphane Huot for helping us collect the conference data that
feeds the UIST Video Browser.
This research is funded by the European Research Council
grant CREATIV (no 321135).

The UIST Video Browser allows the creation of any number of playlists. Users can generate a URL for each playlist
and share it via e-mail, social media channels or messaging
apps. When another user enters a playlist URL, the browser
opens the UIST Video Browser with a copy of the shared
playlist ready to play and personalize. We expect this feature to be popular among research teams who would like to
promote their own video previews on social media, and for

REFERENCES

1. Satyanarayan, A., Strazzulla, D., Klokmose, C. N.,
Beaudouin-Lafon, M., and Mackay, W. E. The CHI 2013
interactive schedule. In CHI’13 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (2013),
2987–2990.
2. Zhang, A., Bhardwaj, A., and Karger, D. Confer: A
Conference Recommendation and Meetup Tool. ACM
Press (2016), 118–121.

1
The featured UIST’15 proceedings and its video previews can be
found at http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2807442

60

