LaserStroke: Mid-air Tactile Experiences
on Contours Using Indirect Laser Radiation
Hojin Lee
Pohang University of Science
and Technology (POSTECH)
Pohang, South Korea
hojini33@postech.ac.kr
Seungmoon Choi
Pohang University of Science
and Technology (POSTECH)
Pohang, South Korea
choism@postech.ac.kr

Hojun Cha
Pohang University of Science
and Technology (POSTECH)
Pohang, South Korea
hersammc@postech.ac.kr
Hyung-Sik Kim
Konkuk University
Chungju, South Korea
hskim98@kku.ac.kr

Junsuk Park
Pohang University of Science
and Technology (POSTECH)
Pohang, South Korea
park64kr@postech.ac.kr
Soon-Cheol Chung
Konkuk University
Chungju, South Korea
scchung@kku.ac.kr

ABSTRACT

This demonstration presents a novel form of mid-air tactile
display, LaserStroke, that makes use of a laser irradiated on
the elastic medium attached to the skin. LaserStroke extends
a laser device with an orientation control platform and a magnetic tracker so that it can elicit tapping and stroking sensations to a user’s palm from a distance. LaserStroke offers
unique tactile experiences while a user freely moves his/her
hand in midair.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Direct skin stroke. (b) LaserStroke: 2D skin stroke by a
laser in free air. (c) System diagram.

Author Keywords

Laser; Haptics; Mid-air; Tactile display; Touch interaction.

ultrasound. Our research group first demonstrated that laserinduced thermoelastic effects can elicit a tactile sensation
when a nanosecond laser is irradiated directly to the human
skin [3]. However, we encountered large individual differences in the induced sensation, ranging from mechanical tap
to pain, and it was due to the individual-dependent optomechanical properties of the skin. To address this problem, we
suggested indirect laser radiation: a laser pulse is irradiated
on the elastic medium attached to the skin [4]. This method
can invoke a tapping-like tactile sensation with little individual variance. In parallel, Ochiai et al. presented a display utilizing a femtosecond laser to provide both visual holograms
and tactile sensations focused in air [5].

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
User Interfaces - Haptic I/O
INTRODUCTION

Most haptic interfaces transfer the energy produced by actuators to the skin through solid channels. This requirement,
however, may undermine the usability of haptic interfaces depending on applications. In such cases, mid-air haptic displays, e.g., those using air jets [6] and acoustic radiation via
ultrasonic waves [2, 1], are promising alternatives transmitting stimulus energy through air. They also provide natural
tactile sensations, but they share one fundamental problem
that the energy travel distance is quite limited.

In this demonstration, we present LaserStroke, a laser-based
mid-air interactive tactile display system, extended from [4]
in order to provide a sequence of moving tactile stimulations
to the user’s palm (Figure 1). In LaserStroke, a laser device is
mounted on a motorized platform that controls the laser radiation orientation, and the user’s hand is tracked by a magnetic
tracker. By irradiating repeated laser shots to the user’s palm,
we can elicit a sensation of smooth stroke on the palm following a given contour in midair. Details are described in the
rest of this paper.

Recently, a new alternative has emerged seeking the possibility of using lasers for mid-air tactile stimulation [3, 4, 5].
A laser can travel a long distance with little energy attenuation, which is a clear advantage compared to air jets and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

HARDWARE COMPOSITION

Figure 2 shows an overview of LaserStroke. We use a QSwitched Nd:YAG laser device (M-NANO, Montfort Laser
GmbH), which has a wavelength of 1064 nm and a pulse

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985708

73

Safety Glasses
Magnetic Tracker Latex Glove

Graphical
User Interface

Latex Glove

Magnetic Tracker

Laser (M-NANO)

50 mm

Laser Tactile
Stimulation

50 mm

Motorized
Gimbal Platform

PVC-Tape
Figure 3. Glove for 2D indirect laser radiation.

Figure 2. Implmented System.

hand accordingly in order to elicit continuous tactile sensations while allowing free movement of the user’s hand. Its use
of laser gives advantages in terms of spatial resolution and
energy travel distance compared to other alternatives. This
demonstration presents two interactive scenarios using LaserStroke to validate the usefulness of laser-based mid-air tactile
displays.

length of 8 ns. The spot size of laser pulse is approximately
5 mm, and the repetition rate of laser pulses is set to 30 Hz.
The laser device is mounted on a commercial gimbal platform
for cameras (CAME-Single, Came-TV), which supports rotational motion of the laser device in two degrees of freedom
(yaw and pitch).
To provide mid-air tactile sensations, we adapt the indirect
laser radiation method presented in [4] as follows. A user
wears a black latex glove that fits the hand tightly (Figure 3).
This is to ensure a sufficient strength of tactile stimulation
and also block unexpected heat transfer. Both are evoked by
the absorption of a laser irradiated on a light-absorbing elastic medium attached to the glove. As for the elastic medium,
the palm of the glove (50 mm × 50 mm) is coated with a black
rubber-coated polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tape. This material is
chosen for its high light-absorption rate and elasticity, which
are crucial to invoke a thermoelastic expansion of the medium
sufficient for tactile perception. The user also wears a wrist
band to which a wireless magnetic tracker (Liberty Latus,
Polhemus) is fastened for position/orientation tracking of the
hand. Laser shots are irradiated on the PVC-taped region on
the glove for tactile rendering.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a Pioneer Research Center Program 2011-0027994 from the National Research Foundation
of Korea.
REFERENCES

1. Carter, T., Seah, S. A., Long, B., Drinkwater, B., and
Subramanian, S. UltraHaptics: Multi-point mid-air haptic
feedback for touch surfaces. In Proc. of ACM UIST
(2013), 505–514.
2. Hoshi, T., Takahashi, M., Iwamoto, T., and Shinoda, H.
Noncontact tactile display based on radiation pressure of
airborne ultrasound. IEEE Trans. Haptics 3, 3 (2010),
155–165.
3. Jun, J.-H., Park, J.-R., Kim, S.-P., Bae, Y. M., Park, J.-Y.,
Choi, S., Park, S. H., Yeom, D.-I., Kim, H.-S., Jung, G.-I.,
Kim, J.-S., and Chung, S.-C. Laser-induced thermoelastic
effects can evoke tactile sensations. Sci. Rep. 5, 11016
(2015), 1–16.

DEMONSTRATION SCENARIOS

Our demonstration will proceed in two interactive scenarios of free stroking and symbol messaging. Each interactive
demo engages two users: a Receiver and a Sender. In both
demos, the Receiver wears the glove and wrist band in one
hand. In the free stroking demo, the Sender sits in a chair
in front of a computer screen and draws a contour on the
screen using a mouse or a Leap Motion controller (a commercial finger tracking device). In the symbol messaging demo,
the Sender selects a symbol out of many symbols (shapes or
alphabets), and then LaserStroke automatically generates a
predefined trajectory for the selected symbol. For these trajectories, LaserStroke computes desired radiation points on
the Receiver’s palm to draw the trajectories and controls the
laser device and mounting platform to irradiate laser shots,
also based on the measured position/orientation of the hand
by the magnetic tracker.

4. Lee, H., Kim, J.-S., Kim, J.-Y., Choi, S., Jun, J.-H., Park,
J.-R., Kim, A.-H., Oh, H.-B., Baek, J.-H., Yang, S.-J.,
Kim, H.-S., and Chung, S.-C. Mid-air tactile stimulation
using indirect laser radiation. IEEE Trans. Haptics
(2016). Early-Access.
5. Ochiai, Y., Kumagai, K., Hoshi, T., Rekimoto, J.,
Hasegawa, S., and Hayasaki, Y. Fairy lights in
femtoseconds: Aerial and volumetric graphics rendered
by focused femtosecond laser combined with
computational holographic fields. ACM Trans. Graphics
35, 2 (2016), 17:1–17:14.
6. Sodhi, R., Poupyrev, I., Glisson, M., and Israr, A.
AIREAL: Interactive tactile experiences in free air. ACM
Trans. Graphics 32, 4 (2013), 134:1–134:10.

CONCLUSIONS

LaserStroke is an interactive mid-air tactile display system
that tracks the user’s hand and irradiates laser beams on the

74

