Wrap & Sense: Grasp Capture by a Band Sensor
Natsuki Miyata1, Takehiro Honoki2, Yusuke Maeda2, Yui Endo1, Mitsunori Tada1, Yuta Sugiura3
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology(AIST)
Tokyo, JAPAN

{n.miyata, y.endo, m.tada}@aist.go.jp

2

Yokohama National University
Kanagawa, JAPAN

honoki-takehiro-dk@ynu.jp
maeda@ynu.ac.jp

3

Keio University
Kanagawa, JAPAN

sugiura@keio.jp

ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a bare hand grasp observation system
named Wrap & Sense. We built a band type sensing
equipment composed of infrared distance sensors placed in
an array. The sensor band is attached to a target object with
all sensors directed along the object surface and detects the
hand side edge with respect to the object. Assuming type of
grasp as “power grasp”, the whole hand posture can be
determined according to the 3D shape of the object. Three
types of application are shown as proof-of-concept.

A

B

Author Keywords

Digital hand model; grasping posture; a band type sensor
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.

C

D

Figure 1. Wrap & Sense capturability and applications. A)
grasp capture, B) grasp preference analysis, C) tennis grip
instruction, D) navigation on riding

INTRODUCTION

The measurement of human hand grasping posture is
required in many fields such as human-computer interaction,
biomechanics, and ergonomics. The measured motion of
how the hand uses daily objects can be analyzed and utilized
to refine the design of products and services.

Instead of capturing the whole hand completely, some
studies (e.g., [1]) have tried to detect the hand partially and
reconstruct the whole hand posture by estimation from
considering mechanical conditions. This approach looks
natural because, as grasp taxonomy suggests, the profile of
grasping hand posture can almost be determined if the object
to grasp and the style of grasp are given.

In terms of precise measurement, an optical motion capture
system that uses reflective markers attached to the hand is a
precise tool. However, the unnatural sensations caused by the
attached markers often lead to different behavior than usual.
Although various devices including wrist-worn types have
been developed to free the hand from such unnaturalness
[4,5, 9,10], it is still challenging to capture bare hand in
contact with objects because the hand is easily occluded by
the objects. This occlusion problem can be combatted by
directly attaching sensor devices to the target object, which
limits direct touch of the object due to widely-spread sensors
[2,3] or would limit capturable grasps to certain patterns due
to complicated detection mechanism [7,8].

In light of the above, we have developed a system Wrap &
Sense (Fig. 1) to observe bare hand grasping posture by
detecting a side edge of the hand by means of a band sensor
attached to the end of an object. We discuss the principle and
implementation of our system as well as showing
applications for proof-of-concept.
WRAP & SENSE PRINCIPLE AND IMPLEMENTATION

Wrap & Sense aims to enable grasp capture of a target object
by wrapping a band type sensing equipment around the
object at the end of it. Assuming that we deal with a target
object that can be roughly approximated as a cylinder, we
propose to use a sensing equipment that is composed of
distance sensors in which all the sensors are directed in the
same direction along the surface of the object. If the object
surface is not bumpy, each sensor can detect the distance
between itself and the crossing point of the sensor direction
with the contacting hand side edge, that is, the ulnar side of
the thumb and radial side of the index finger.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985713

An overview of our observation system is given in Figure 2.
Once the sensing equipment is attached to the target object,

87

Measurement

Attach!

A band sensor
composed of
distance sensors

3D object model with
Sensor configuration
definition

Hand model
with feature points

Edge Detection

P1

Posture
Reconstruction

P3

Actual
Object

P2

Actual
hand

Distances

The points detected
as likely to be on the
hand edge

Positions

Displayed
hand model

Figure 2. System overview of Wrap & Sense

measurement can be conducted. The equipment sends a set
of distances to a computer and the computer converts each
distance into relative coordinates on the object using a sensor
configuration definition on a 3D object model. Considering
the range of detected distance, we can find several adjacent
points that are likely to correspond to the detected hand edge.
A hand model is then aligned to these points so that the
corresponding part overlaps. To define the whole hand
posture with this alignment, we compensate for absent
information about the part that was not directly detected by
the sensor system on the basis of assumed grasp type. For
example, when the hand is grasping an object in a power
grasp style, the rest of the fingers (middle, ring, and little
finger) are naturally aligned along the object surface and
almost the entire area on the palmar side comes into contact
with the object.

Micro Controller
Li-Po Battery
XBee Module

Infrared Distance Sensor
Figure 3. Prototype implementation

Grip instruction for tennis player: In addition to recording
player’s grip on a court, typical grasping hand image (a
certain kind of grip in tennis) can be presented as well as the
player’s current hand posture (Fig. 1 C). This can help a selfschooling player to learn complicated grip techniques.

We fabricated a prototype of the Wrap & Sense sensing
equipment (Fig. 3) using eight to eleven infrared distance
measuring sensor units (Sharp Corporation, GP2Y0A21YK)
connected with a micro controller (Arduino SRL, Arduino
Mega 2560/Arduino ProMini), to convert an analog signal
into a digital one and to communicate with the software
running on the computer. A radio module (Digi International,
XBee 802.15.4 module) was installed to enable wireless
connection. Each digital signal was converted into distance
on the basis of calibration data collected at different
distances to deal with the nonlinear responsiveness of the
system.

Navigation on a bicycle: Captured handle grasps are
categorized into five groups according to the position of the
metacarpophalangeal joint of the middle finger. The user can
then control a map view without releasing the handle by
using related navigation movements (eg., moving to east) of
each group (Fig. 1 D).
CONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed a grasp observation system, Wrap
& Sense, for the bare hand. By means of attaching sensing
equipment composed of infrared distance sensors formed as
a band, the system detects the hand edge with respect to the
grasped object and reconstruct the whole hand posture by
aligning the hand model based on the detected edge location
on the object model. The implementation of three
applications demonstrates the potential of the proposed
sensing and reconstructing system as a communication and
interaction tool as well as measurement system.

Hand model of an arbitrary user can be created by deforming
a generic hand model derived from medical images to satisfy
hand dimensions of the target user [6].
APPLICATIONS

The followings are applications that utilize capture of
grasping postures by the proposed system as shown in Figure
1 A).

Current system is limited to detecting “power grasp” of a
cylinder(-like) object by a single hand. Our future work will
include extension to seamless detection of both hands for
more natural interaction detection as well as brushing up the
current algorithm in terms of its speed and stability.

Preferred grasp location analysis for design assistance:
The preferred grasping area on the object can be displayed in
color map by analyzing the collected grasps. Figure 1 B)
presents an example of different grasp preference for the
same product at different locations.

REFERENCES

1. Achibet, M., Casiez, G., Lécuyer, A., Marchal, M.,
THING: Introducing a Tablet-based Interaction

88

Technique for Controlling 3D Hand Models. In Proc.
CHI15, ACM (2015), 317-326.

Model with a Skeleton and a Surface Skin. International
Journal of Human Factors Modelling and Simulation,
Vol.3, No.2, Inderscience (2012), 147-168.

2. Dementyev A., Kao H.L., Paradiso J.A., SensorTape:
Modular and Programmable 3D-Aware Dense Sensor
Network on a Tape. In Proc. UIST '15, ACM (2015),
649-658.

7. Ono M., Shizuki B., and Tanaka J., Touch & Activate:
Adding Interactivity to Existing Objects using Active
Acoustic Sensing. In Proc. UIST ’13, ACM (2013), 3140.

3. Gong, N.W, Steimle, J., Olberding, S., Hodges, S.,
Gillian, N., Kawahara, Y., and Paradiso, J.A.,
PrintSense: A Versatile Sensing Technique to Support
Multimodal Flexible Surface Interaction. In Proc.
CHI’14, ACM (2014), 1407-1410.

8. Sato, M. Poupyrev, I, and Harrison, C. Touché:
Enhancing Touch Interaction on Humans, Screens,
Liquids, and Everyday Objects. In Proc. CHI '12, ACM
(2012) 483-492.

4. Kim D., Hilliges O., Izadi S., Butler A., Chen J.,
Oikonomidis I., Olivier P., 2012. Digits: Freehand 3D
Interactions Anywhere Using a WristWorn Gloveless
Sensor. In Proc UIST’12, ACM (2012), 167-176.

9. Yoshimoto S., Kawaguchi J., Imura M., Oshiro O.,
Finger motion capture from wrist-electrode contact
resistance. In Proc. EMBC’15, 3185-3188.
10. Zhang Y. and Harrison C., Tomo: Wearable, Low-Cost,
Electrical Impedance Tomography for Hand Gesture
Recognition. In Proc. UIST’15, ACM (2015), 167-173.

5. LeapMotion,-HomePage. https://www.leapmotion.com/,
Accessed: March 2016
6. Miyata, N., Shimizu, Y., Motoki, Y., Maeda, Y.,
Mochimaru, M., Hand MoCap Using an Individual

89

