An Input Switching Interface Using Carbon Copy Metaphor
Kaori Ikematsu
Ochanomizu University
2-1-1, Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
g0920502@gmail.com

Itiro Siio
Ochanomizu University
2-1-1, Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
siio@acm.org

ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a novel input technique that aims to
switch between relative and absolute coordinates input methods seamlessly based on the “carbon copy” metaphor for
track-pads.
Figure 1. Fingertip Positions when Handling a Carbon Paper.

Author Keywords

Input Techniques; Touch; Pointing; Gesture;
utilizing touch inputs on a smartphone is discussed. It focuses on rapid movement across large distances. In [1], a pen
device is used, and [3] uses motion capture sensors. Our proposed method achieves this by using a widespread touchpad
without any special hardware or sensor. Inklet is a utility that
also allows a common trackpad to emulate virtual absolute
coordinates input area by using predefined shortcut keys. Our
technique provides intuitive and explicit operations based on
the carbon copy metaphor. It will be more understandable
than using pre-defined shortcut keys.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 User Interfaces: input devices and strategies
INTRODUCTION

Owing to the widespread use of touch surfaces, such as in
smartphones, tablets, and trackpads, touch inputs can be seen
in everyday life. At present, two input methods are used for
touch surfaces. that is, relative coordinates and absolute coordinates pointing. Particular input equipment such as a pen
tablet is required when a user performs absolute coordinates
pointing. It allows a user to hand-draw or paint easily by providing absolute coordinates input to devices based on the relative coordinate input method. In a large screen environment,
precise operation becomes difficult because of size difference
between the screen and trackpad. By providing a small area
that corresponds directly to a trackpad on the screen and allowing a user to input absolute coordinates only in this area,
the problem can be resolved. However, a user interface for
moving the small area and setting it on the screen is required. However, relative coordinate input method is suitable
for common GUI operation. Even small finger movement can
be used for large cursor movement, and precise operations
can be performed, as mentioned before. In this study, we
propose a new interface method based on the “carbon copy”
metaphor for seamless mode switching between the following two modes: (a) input mode for the area enabling absolute
coordinates input and (b) moving mode for this input area.

CARBON COPY METAPHOR

Our proposed method allows users to absolute input for the
limited area, and the area can be moved to any optional place.
A trackpad represents a carbon paper; it seems like an operation to create a carbon copy below a paper by using a small
carbon paper and drawing paper. Aiming to achieve absoluterelative hybrid input, we adopted the “carbon copy” metaphor
similarly to using a carbon paper. Our proposed method allows general trackpad operations for users in a conventional
manner. Conversely, a virtual “carbon paper” appears on the
display when the users touch the trackpad with their non dominant hand. The virtual carbon paper on the computer display is a metaphor of the actual carbon paper. Our proposed
method is based on this hand motion: a user can manipulate the virtual “carbon paper” using similar actions, which
they would apply to a physical carbon paper (Fig.1). The
movement operation can be performed by touching the carbon paper with one finger of each hand (dominant and non
dominant), and the writing operation (absolute coordinate inputs) can be performed by touching the carbon paper with
two fingers of the non dominant hand for holding it and then
pressing with a finger of the dominant hand or a pen held by
dominant hand.

RELATED WORK

Various methods combine relative and absolute coordinate inputs. In [2], the switching of two coordinates input mode by

To design user actions on a touch surface of an interface
based on the carbon copy metaphor, we conducted an observational study regarding the manipulation of a carbon paper
in the real world. We assigned a drawing task to six participants (five right-handed, one left-handed, ages 2124). We
used a drawing paper (500mm × 400mm), small carbon pa-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Copyright is held by the au-thor/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985715

93

Figure 4. Trackpad divided into two areasA case for a right-handed
person

ticipants on a carbon paper, we adopted “Pressing the edge
of a carbon paper with two spreading fingers of the non dominant hand” as a condition for the writing operation. When
a user uses two spreading fingers of the non dominant hand
to press the edge of a trackpad while moving the cursor with
one finger, a small working area with the same aspect ratio as
a trackpad appears at the cursor location on the screen. This
small working area (carbon copy area) is enabling absolute
coordinates inputs. The absolute coordinates input mode is
called the “carbon copy mode.” When the user removes the
two non dominant fingers, the carbon copy area disappears,
and the input mode switches to the conventional relative coordinates input mode. It provides seamless switching between
the moving carbon copy area and carbon copy mode operations.

Figure 2. Frequency of the number of fingers used to hold the carbon
paper

IMPLEMENTATION

Figure 3. Frequency of drawing posture: drawing between or outside
the fingers used for holding the paper

To test the efficiency of our proposed method, we implemented a prototype, a painting application, in Objective-C for
use on a Mac OS X 10.9 operating system. Touching the trigger area with one finger activates the carbon copy area (the
black-edged area on the screen). When compared with the
preliminary experiment, in the prototype, the entire desktop
area corresponds to the drawing paper and the black-framed
carbon copy area corresponds to the carbon paper. As Fig.4
shows, we divided a trackpad into two parts (non dominant
hand side: trigger area, dominant hand side: input area). Our
prototype allows a user to display/fix the screen using two
fingers of the non dominant hand touching the trigger area of
the trackpad. The user can draw in the carbon copy area with
one finger of the dominant hand touching the input area of
the trackpad. The position coordinate of the carbon copy area
corresponds directly to that of a trackpad and allows a user to
input by absolute coordinates. When the user puts one finger
on the trigger area and one finger on the input area, the location of the carbon copy area can be changed by manipulating
relative coordinates inputs.

per (130mm × 130mm), and ballpoint pen that ran out of
ink. Participants sign their own name on the left half of the
drawing paper and paint freely on the right half.
We recorded this experiment and looked for patterns in which
the fingers were used for handling a carbon paper. When participants carried out the task, to write or draw on the paper,
they pressed the edge of the carbon paper with their non dominant hand. This indicates that the participants utilized a wide
drawing area and prevented the carbon paper from floating
or peeling off. Fig. 2 shows the ratio of the time the fingers
touched the carbon paper to that taken for the execution of the
entire task. There are significant differences in frequencies of
pairs of three fingers and other touches.
The t-test calculation showed that there are significant differences in frequencies of pairs of three fingers and other
touches, such as between a three-finger touch and two-finger
touch (t(5) = 4.028, p < 0.001), three-finger touch and fourfinger touch (t(5) = 3.007, p < 0.005) and three-finger touch
and five-finger touch (t(5) = 3.466, p < 0.005). All the other
pairs are not considered significant. As shown in Fig. 3, we
found that the participants tended to open certain two fingers
widely, which means the participants decisively used two fingers for holding a carbon paper. Conversely, various finger
movements were observed when the participants moved the
carbon copy paper.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we proposed novel mode switching technique
based on the carbon copy metaphor. It provides relative and
absolute coordinates inputs by using a touch pad embedded
in a laptop or a consumer trackpad. Based on the experiment,
we implemented a desktop application available in a real GUI
environment. We are planning to add a new function for virtual carbon paper, such as taking snapshots in the carbon copy
area and sharing them to a smartphone. Furthermore, users
can edit these snapshots in the smartphone. We will release
our application as a GUI widget to allow the system to be
used by a larger number of users.

INTERFACE DESIGN

We designed the interface based on the preliminary experiment as follows. Focusing on the writing behavior of the par-

94

REFERENCES
1. Forlines, C., Vogel, D., and Balakrishnan, R. Hybridpointing: Fluid switching
between absolute and relative pointing with a direct input device. In Proceedings of
the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
UIST ’06, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2006), 211–220.

3.

2. McCallum, D. C., and Irani, P. Arc-pad: Absolute+relative cursor positioning for
large displays with a mobile touchscreen. In Proceedings of the 22Nd Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’09, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2009), 153–156.

95

Vogel, D., and Balakrishnan, R. Distant freehand pointing and clicking on very
large, high resolution displays. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’05, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2005), 33–42.

