Designing a Haptic Feedback System for Hearing-Impaired
to Experience Tap Dance
Mina Shibasaki, Youichi Kamiyama, Kouta Minamizawa
Keio University Graduate School of Media Design
4-1-1 Hiyoshi,Kohoku-ku,Yokohama,223-8526 Japan
{mina0415, kamiyama, kouta}@kmd.keio.ac.jp

Figure 1 The Karada tap performance and the audience
ABSTRACT

INTRODUCTION

In this study, we have designed a system to enable hearingimpaired to enjoy the performance of tap dancers. This
system transfers the haptic sensation of tap dancing from
the stage to the audience and helps hearing-impaired people
enjoy the vibration of the taps even if they cannot hear the
sound. We organized an event to verify the effectiveness of
the system. To do this, we collaborated with a tap dance
unit and science museum. We found that our system
succeeded in helping the tap dancers share the fun and
enjoyment of dance with the audience comprising people
with hearing disabilities.

We enjoy performance art mainly through our visual and
auditory senses. Specifically, tap dance is a performance
medium that relies on hearing. However, hearing-impaired
people cannot hear the rhythm of tap dance. Moreover, it is
difficult to understand the sound component of tap dance
through vision alone. Therefore, we developed a system
that allows hearing-impaired people to realize the fun of tap
dance through haptic sensation or the sensation of the skin.
Previous studies used haptic feedback technologies to
enable hearing-impaired people to perceive sound via touch.
Eberhardt et al. developed OMAR [1], a device that
manipulates a hearing-impaired person’s fingers in response
to sound to enable them to perceive speech; Nanayakkara et
al. developed the Haptics Chair [2], a system to assist
hearing-impaired people with speech perception and enrich
their experience of music. Honda et al. developed
ONTENA [3], a wearable device to assist hearing-impaired
people in perceiving sound in daily life. Watanabe et al.’s
workshop, Heartbeat Picnic [4], used the vibrations of
heartbeats as haptic information that enabled the experience
of feeling one’s own heartbeat. Their attempts aim at
enabling a hearing-impaired person perceive sound using
haptic technology. However, each of these systems was
designed to be used by single person. Therefore, we
attempted to create an experience of a dance performance
for multiple people to appreciate. In this study, we have
developed a system that transfers the haptic sensation of tap
dance from the stage to the audience.

Author Keywords

Tap Dance; Hearing-Impaired; Embodied
Interaction;Haptics;TECHTILE
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 User Interfaces (D.2.2, H.1.2, I.3.6): Haptic I/O and
User-centered design.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985716

97

EMBODIED APPRECIATION SYSTEM FOR TAP DANCE

DISCUSSION

Figure 2 illustrates the implementation of our system. This
system is based on TECHTILE[5] technology. We set up
haptic microphones in the stage in order to not restrict the
dancers’ movement. The stage was 1.8 m × 1.8 m and the
haptic microphones were positioned at both ends of the
front of the stage and at the rear center of the stage. The
audience seating provided haptic information as the output
using a power amplifier. To accommodate many people, we
set up three types of output: chair, floor, and handheld. The
audience did not have to wear any device to experience the
performance. We called our system “Karada Tap.”

Karada tap created empathy between dancers and
visitors
“Thank you for making my wish come true…There are various
types of people in the Hearing-impaired category of people. For
example, a person does not know sound at all; they are interested
in sound; a person who cannot sufficiently hear on the other day
like me and gave up enjoying sound music, song and stage
performance…. This system enabled me to enjoy the vibration, as
if I could hear the sound.”(Shuwapprin Kiyomi Hearing-Impaired
People)
“I can’t hear a low-pitched sound at all. I had given up on feeling
the rhythms of Tap dance. I was surprised and impressed. This
system helped me understand how to Tap dance.”(Woman aged 40,
Hearing-Impaired)
“I have never known that the rhythm of Tap dance is so fine
because I have hearing difficulties. This system made me realize
that tap was very fine.”(Woman aged 20, Hearing-Impaired)

It appears that visitors with hearing impairments were
surprised. One of the visitors had her hand over her mouth
because she had never known about sound before. In
addition, we induced visitors with hearing disabilities to
feel the rhythm and realize that the tap was very fine. We
succeeded to tie vibration and the taps of tap dance.
Through this experiment, we succeeded to combine the tap
dancers’ wish to introduce interest of tap dance to the
hearing-impaired people who gave up enjoying the sound of
tap by using haptic feedback. In addition, we can say less
the distance between dancer and visitor because to make
someone feel that visitor who is Normal-Hearing people
attended to Karadatap and kids were concentrating at
Karadatap. We got many suggestions from the NormalHearing and Hearing-Impaired people that they wanted to
spread this system.

Figure 2 Implementation of the embodied appreciation system
PUBLIC PERFORMANCE

We organized an event to verify the effectiveness of the
Karada Tap system. We staged the performance six times
over two days, with three performances per day. The
performance was conducted once every half hour. The
procedure for the performance was as follows: 1)
Introduction to the event 2) Normal performance of tap
dance without the Karada Tap system; 3) Introduction to
the dancers and haptic technology; 4) Performance using
Karada Tap; 5) Interview with the audience; and 6) Onstage experience (15 min). During the on-stage experience,
it was possible for the audience to use the handheld output
device to feel their own taps.

In addition, Karada tap created empathy between dancers
and visitors. Many people could enjoy tap-dance at the
same time.

The number of visitors to this event was about 270 people
(including about 20 hearing-impaired people). The audience
included families, a professional dancers, hearing-impaired
people, visual impaired people, and a UI designer who has a
hearing handicap. Figure1 shows the actual conditions of
the event. Hearing-impaired audience members used sign
language to understand tap. People sometimes laid a hand
on their chairs. We observed children and a professional
dancer lie down on the floor to feel the taps using their
whole body. We also saw active participation during the onstage experience. Hearing-impaired members appeared to
be enjoying the feeling of their own steps. Comparing the
normal performance and the performance using Karada Tap,
we could confirm that a person with a hearing handicap was
swaying their body to the rhythm when the performance
used Karada Tap.

CONCLUSION

We developed the Karada Tap system to provide the
rhythm of tap dance to hearing-impaired people. This
system succeeded in helping tap dancers share the fun of
dance with an audience comprising hearing-impaired
People. This system also has the potential to be a tool for
expression. The Karada Tap system can achieve our
purpose to let hearing-impaired People realize the fun of tap
dance through haptic feedback; it also helps dancers and
visitors empathize with each other, satisfying the
requirements of Kiyomi. In future research, Haptic
feedback technology is expected that all people, with or
without disabilities can enjoy tap dance.

As result of a survey on the degree of audience
satisfaction. All respondents answered that they were “very
satisfied” or “satisfied” and 95% of hearing-impaired
participants understood the rhythm of tap.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by JST-ACCEL Embodied Media
Project and JSPS KAKENHI Grant #26700018.

98

with Special Needs. Springer International Publishing,
2014. pp. 382-385.

REFERENCES

1. OMAR a haptic dis-play for speech perception by deaf
and deaf-blind individuals. IEEE1993.pp. 195-201.

4. Watanabe, Junji. "Aesthetic Aspects of TechnologyMediated Self-awareness Experiences." Natural
Computing and Beyond. Springer Japan, 2013. pp.148153

2. Nanayakkara, S, et al. "An enhanced musical experience
for the deaf: design and evaluation of a music display
and a haptic chair. " In Proceedings of the CHI2009,
ACM. 2009, April, pp. 337-346.

5. Minamizawa, et al. "TECHTILE toolkit: a prototyping
tool for design and education of haptic media."
Proceedings of VRIC2012. ACM, 2012. pp.1-2.

3. Honda, Tatsuya, and Makoto Okamoto. "User Interface
Design of Sound Tactile." Computers Helping People

99

