PeopleGarden: Creating Data Portraits for Users
Rebecca Xiong, Judith Donath
MIT Media Laboratory
20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
{becca, judith}@media.mit.edu
PeopleGarden URL: http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~becca/papers/pgarden
ABSTRACT

Many on-line interaction environments have a large number
of users. It is difficult for the participants, especially new
ones, to form a clear mental image about those with whom
they are interacting. How can we compactly convey
information about these participants to each other? We
propose the data portrait, a novel graphical representation
of users based on their past interactions. Data portraits can
inform users about each other and the overall social
environment. We use a flower metaphor for creating
individual data portraits, and a garden metaphor for
combining these portraits to represent an on-line
environment. We will review previous work in visualizing
both individuals and groups. We will then describe our
visualizations, explain how to create them, and show how
they can be used to address user questions.
KEYWORDS: Information visualization, data portraits,

user-centered visualization, interaction context.
1. INTRODUCTION

On-line interaction environments such as Web-based
message boards, chat rooms, and Usenet newsgroups have
become widely popular. As the number of participants
rises, it is increasingly difficult to distinguish individual
users and to comprehend the overall interaction context.
Often, users must piece together a holistic view of other
users through extended participation. This makes it difficult
for new users to find appropriate groups to participate in
and people to interact with. Even existing users may find it
difficult to keep track of an ever-changing population.

1.

Do participants here really get involved? (Post
frequently or only once in a while?)

2.

How much interaction is there? (Do people
respond to each other?)

3.

Do participants here welcome newcomers? (Do
newcomers get many replies?)

4.

Who are the experts? (Who has been here for
some time or posted many messages?)

Figure 1. Users’ questions about a discussion group.

A simple solution to seeing information about users is to
sort all the postings by author. Deja’s Web interface for
the Usenet news shows author’s previous postings
[Deja99]. While such views offer some information about
author's level of involvement or interests, users still need to
search for responses from other authors or for comparison
with other authors of the group.
What is needed is the ability to look at different patterns in
the archives of postings, such as users' contribution, the
rate of responses, the interaction among users, etc..
Although such patterns are hard to see in a mass of archival
data, by visualizing the salient data, the key roles and
relationships can be readily perceived.
Our solution is the data portraits (see Figure 2). Unlike
photo-realistic portraits, which show physical features such
as gender, age, or race; data portraits are abstract
representations of users’ interaction history.

What is missing is effective communication of information
about participants to each other. Figure 1 lists four
questions users might ask about the underlying social
environment (the quantitative measures in parentheses
provide insights to these questions):

Figure 2. What can data portraits like the ones above tell us
about discussion groups? A group with a dominating voice
vs. a more democratic group.

In following sections, first we discuss previous peoplecentered visualizations in more detail. In Section 3, we
will define data portraits and discuss how they can be
created. Section 4 describes in detail PeopleFlower, our
method for creating data portraits. Section 5 describes how
PeopleGarden uses a series of PeopleFlowers to represent
the different users of an on-line environment. Sections 6
and 7 shed light on the details of implementation and
design rationale. Finally, Section 8 describes the future
work and Section 9 concludes.
2. PREVIOUS WORK IN VISUALIZING PEOPLE

Information visualization has traditionally been used for the
analysis of large amounts of commercial, financial, and
scientific data. With the decreasing cost of graphics
hardware, it has increasingly been used to help people to
interactively filter through information for everyday tasks
such as selecting movies [Ahlberg94, Card99]. We
examine here people-centered visualizations for showing
data about a person, illuminating relationships among
people, and for representing individuals for on-line
interaction.
2.1 Visualizing individual’s history

There has been relatively little work focusing on
visualizing information about individuals. One notable
exception is Plaisant et al’s LifeLines, which shows
detailed life history of a person using time-lines
[Plaisant96]. It is effective for detailed examination of an
individual's medical or criminal records, but is not meant
for comparing a group of people.
2.2 Visualizing relationships among people

Comparisons of groups of people have been the focus of
social network analysis, which studies the dynamics of
relationships among people using a network diagram: each
person is represented as a node, links between nodes
represent various connections between people.
Originating with Jacob Moreno’s sociometric research
[Moreno36] in the 1920’s, social network analysis has
demonstrated the dense interconnections between people
that allow any two people on Earth to connect through six
or fewer intermediaries [Milgram67]. Network diagrams
have also been used to illuminate the empirical structure of
local communities, inter-office patterns of communication,
and collaboration patterns for papers [Wellman79,
Krebs96, Kautz98]. When there are a large number of
links, the network diagrams can get fairly complex. These
visualizations are useful for sociologists to analyze group
dynamics, but are less suitable for average users to gain a
sense of the connections among people.
A related piece of work is Judith Donath’s
VisualWho[Donath95], which uses the positions and
shades of people's names to convey their affiliation and

presence. The emphasis of the visualization is more on
showing relationships among people, and less on
information about individuals.
2.3 Representing people

A third area of related work is the design of avatars in
virtual environments. Avatars include such varied
representations as smiley faces, cartoon characters, 3D
models, or photographic representation of users [Damer97,
Kurlander96].
Avatars have been used in a variety of 2D and 3D chat
rooms and virtual environments. Steve Benford’s avatars
show where in the virtual environment a user is looking at
and acting upon [Benford94]. Paul Rankin’s Star Cursor
uses the idea of inner vs. outer space to convey interests of
users [Rankin98]. Fernanda Viegas’ Chat Circle represents
users as circles, and changes the size of a circle if the user
sends out a message [Viegas99].
These avatars show the current state of the individuals, but
do not change over time based on users' past interactions.
They do not convey how long the person represented has
been in an environment, or whether he/she is a prolific
contributor to the conversation.
3. THE DATA PORTRAIT

While there are previous visualizations that convey a user's
history, show how users are related, or are compact enough
to represent individuals in an on-line environment, we have
not found a single visualization that combines all of the
above. Our solution is the data portrait, or user
visualization based on interaction data, both to represent
individual users and to compare multiple users.
In real life, successful portraits show the physical likeliness
of people; they also use objects in people's lives to
illustrate their interests and status [Art97, Brilliant93]. This
second aspect is an inspiration for our work. The on-line
equivalent of one's objects is data about one's past
interactions. For a Web-based message board, where users
can post messages or respond to others' messages, a user’s
data objects are the set of all the messages posted by
him/her. In a chat room, the data objects are the messages
sent by each user.
A data portrait is a visualization of the user based on
his/her data objects. Different portraits can be created for
different users depending on the number and attributes of
the data objects. Possible attributes for data objects such
as messages include time of creation, size, addressee,
whether an initial message or a response, or number of
responses from others. Various visual parameters such as
the size, hue, saturation, or shape of the data portrait can
then be used to represent these attributes.

The challenge in creating successful data portraits is thus
two-fold: 1) selecting those attributes about data objects
that best convey information about a user, and 2) deciding
how to visualize these attributes legibly and intuitively.
Over time, a user’s portrait changes based on his changing
interaction; the portrait will thus always show the most upto-date data about its user. Unlike avatar representation,
these portraits are based on real interaction history.
A collection of data portraits can be used to represent the
participants of an on-line environment. Such an overview
allows users to see overall trends in the data, such as the
level of user participation or the amount of interaction.
Because data portraits are generated by simple, uniform
rules, they form small multiples that can be compared and
contrasted [Tufte91].
As with any visualizations of user information, user privacy
is a concern. Our focus is on using information
visualization within the context of a community. The
visualizations are of publicly available data about the
people in the community and their relationships; the target
audience is also the members of that community.

visualizations of Usenet newsgroups, Web page traversals,
or Chat room interactions with few modifications. We will
discuss more in Section 8.
Each PeopleFlower represent a user of the message board,
and its petals his/her postings. The different visual
parameters of a petal can be used to represent different
attributes about each posting. We found the time of
posting, the amount of response, and whether a post starts a
new conversation to be the three most valuable attributes in
conveying social information about the user, as
demonstrated below.
4.1 Time since posting

Time of posting is an important attribute for showing
posting history. PeopleFlower indicates time in both the
ordering and the saturation of petals. A message posted far
in the past would be less saturated and less noticeable. As a
user posts more messages to the board, his or her
PeopleFlower will change, as shown in Figure 4.

4. PEOPLE FLOWER: VISUALIZING A USER

We will now discuss in more detail PeopleFlower, our
visualization of the individual. Each user is represented as
a flower, as shown in Figure 3. His/her data objects are
represented as petals of the flower, arranged by time in a
clockwise fashion.

Figure 4. A user’s PeopleFlower changes over time.

A few things to note here:
•

The numbers of petals increases as more messages are
posted, just as a flower opens up.

•

Older petals move to the left as newer petals are added
to the right, to maintain symmetry. The overall shape
of a flower is determined by how many petals it has.

•

Each petal fades over time showing time since posting.

•

A marked difference in saturation of adjacent petals,
seen in the rightmost flower, denotes a gap in posting.

Figure 3. Basic PeopleFlower.

Visual artists have long emphasized using representations
that have the same level of visual and conceptual
complexity as the objects they represent [Arnheim89]. We
therefore wanted a simple object that can easily deal with a
changing number of components. We also like the organic
nature of a flower, and the suggestion that it changes over
time, as users do. The flower metaphor was chosen for its
simplicity and intuitiveness. Other visualizations that use
radial layout to display data include radar sweep
visualizations and Kiviat Diagrams [Jefferies97, Harris97].
For more technical discussions on creating organic or nonphoto-realistic rendering, see [Kowalski99, Raskar99]
For simplicity, we will focus our discussion on a Webbased message board. Our findings can be generalized to

4.2 Response to posting

PeopleFlower can display not only a user’s own posting
pattern, but also the amount of feedback from other users
of the board. This is important for illustrating the amount
of interaction in an environment. We have used pistil-like
circles on top of the petals to denote responses. Each circle
indicates one response to a post, as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Three users with same amount of postings over
different durations, and with different amount of responses.

While the three users in Figure 5 posted the same amount
of messages, they posted at different time interval, as
indicated by the saturation of the petals. The amount of
responses also varies greatly.
•

User A posted a series of messages in a short interval,
and has not posted for a while.

•

Initial response to A was high, over time it decreased.

•

Users B and C both posted their messages over longer
intervals, but C has gotten much more response.

4.3 Initial post vs. reply

Why do the amounts of responses differ for these three
users? Figure 6 shows the same PeopleFlowers with petals
colored by whether the post starts a new conversation (i.e.
initial posts versus replies). This scheme has been used in
the Loom visualization for newsgroups [Donath99].

Figure 6. The same three users from Figure 5, this time
with magenta representing initial posts, blue replies. (See
http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~becca/papers/pgarden .)

Colorado and stuff - Jen 21:50:54 4/23/99 (1)
Re: Colorado and stuff - Dan 08:57:48 4/24/99 (0)
Apology for "provoking" - Cathy 22:00:48 4/22/99 (2)
Re: Apology for "provoking" - James 12:47:31 4/23/99 (1)
Re: Apology for "provoking" - Mia 06:05:28 4/24/99 (0)
L/R Brain info. continued... - Kam 18:44:28 4/22/99 (1)
Re: L/R Brain info. cont... and.... - Cathy 21:02:30 4/22/99 (0)

Figure 7. Traditional view of a message board.

PeopleGarden specifies how to layout the flowers for
overview and comparison of users. We have used the
garden metaphor because a healthy garden has certain
properties that we can use to represent a healthy discussion
group. For example, a garden with more bright flowers
indicates a discussion group with more new posts. It looks
healthier than one with faded flowers representing a group
with mostly old posts.
Figure 8 shows a PeopleGarden created for the same
message board. The height of a flower represents how long
a user has been in the board, as indicated by time of first
posting. This uses the metaphor that a flower planted
earlier is taller than one planted later. A few patterns here:
•

Many people have participated at the board since the
beginning, and have been prolific contributors since.

User A started with an initial post (shown in magenta),
perhaps a question or a new topic of discussion. There
were many responses. Then User A replied to others’
postings, and the level of response gradually dropped.

•

A large number of casual participants dropped by to
make a few posts.

•

There are more users joining the board in the first half
than the second.

•

User B only responded to others' posts, as indicated by
all blue posts.

•

Users C made both initial posts and replies. This user
likes to both start new conversation and interact with
others. User C received the most replies.

We can also notice outliers such as the big red flower twothirds from the top and two-thirds from the left of Figure 8.
While most people have more to say the longer they have
been at the board, this relative late-comer has really
bloomed and contributed much to the discussion.

We gain more insight into the situation:
•

This example seems to suggest that one way to get more
response from others would be to start a new conversation.
See [Whittaker98, Smith99] for more studies about the
interaction dynamics of Usenet newsgroups.

Now let us return to the four user questions we have raised
at the beginning of the paper about on-line environments:
Q1. Do participants here really get involved? (Post
frequently or only once in a while?)
Q2. How much interaction is there? (Do people reply?)

5. PEOPLE GARDEN: VISUALIZING GROUP OF USERS

Having described our representation of individual users, we
will now turn to placing these individual representations in
the larger context of the on-going discussions, i.e. the
message board. Figure 7 shows a section of a sample board
with about 1200 messages posted by 150 authors over the
period of two months.
Currently, users need to read through a large amount of text
to determine who’s who in the message board.
PeopleGarden is designed to facilitate this task. While
PeopleFlower specifies how to represent individual users,

Q3. Do participants here welcome newcomers? (Do
newcomers get many replies?)
Q4. Who are the experts? (Who has been here for some
time or posted many messages?)
The PeopleGarden in Figure 8 can help to answer a couple
of these questions.
A1. There are many users here with varying level of
involvement. Many of them have also posted
continuously, denoted by smooth change of saturation
across a wide range.

Figure 8. A PeopleGarden showing messages from a message board with 1200 postings over
a 2-month period. Height of flower denotes amount of time a user has been at the board.

A4. The most prolific contributors also tend to be those
who have been here the longest, and can be found at
the top of the figure.
Figure 8 is useful for answering questions about general
posting trends, since all the flowers are displayed at once.
For detailed questions about the level of responses to
individuals, another view is required.
Figure 9 shows a different PeopleGarden that lays out
flowers sorted by the amount of petals. Posts are colored
differently based on whether it is an initial post. The
responses for each post are also shown. A smaller message
board is used here to show the details more closely. Figure
9 can help to answer the remaining questions:
A2. People in this board respond to each other quite a bit.
In fact, most posts are responses shown in blue, and
more than half the posts are replied to, as indicated by
the gold pistils.
A3. Newcomers shown at the bottom have a 50-50 chance
of getting a response, only slightly worse than the oldtimers. Also, their initial posts are much more likely to
get a response.

Figure 9. A PeopleGarden sorted by amount of postings.
Magenta denotes initial postings, and blue replies. (See
http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~becca/papers/pgarden for
colored picture.)

5.1 Comparing different groups

PeopleGarden applied to multiple groups shows how the
interaction in these groups differs. For example, Figure 10
shows the PeopleGardens for two groups with around 200
posts each, but very different interaction. Height of a
flower again denotes how long a user has been at the board.
The URLs for the two groups are respectively
•

http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~becca/enneagram/movieboard

•

http://www.usscreen.com/message/general/

Figure 10a) shows a group with one dominating voice with
many initial posts (in magenta) and more responses (in
blue). There is a trickle of new participants throughout the
time period, most of whom tend to post replies. This is
more a discussion group with predominantly replies in
blue. Figure 10b) shows a more democratic group with
more equal participation. There are a larger number of
participants, each of who posted between 1 and 10
messages. People tend to post more initial posts than
replies. This suggests that this group is more of an
announcement group.
6. IMPLEMENTATION

PeopleGarden has been implemented as a Java applet. Each
petal of a PeopleFlower is a 4-sided polygon. To create a
flower, draw each petal in a clockwise fashion. The spacing
between petals is the same for all flowers in a garden. The
flower with the largest number of petals almost completes a
circle.

Figure 10 a) A group with one dominating voice
(http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~becca/enneagram/movieboard,
July ’99) with a large number of replies in blue. Height of a
flower denotes how long a user has been at the board.

PeopleGarden lays out the individual flowers by setting
their center point. For example, the sorted view reduces
row by row the spacing between the center points of
flowers. Thus, the later flowers with less information will
not take up disproportional amount of screen real estate.
7. DISCUSSION

Different encodings of the display and layout of
PeopleFlowers can be used for expressing different data.
How does one decide which visual encoding to use? While
we have not yet conducted formal user testing, we have
collected informal feedback from people. We found that
people prefer encodings with some basis in reality. For
example, most users found it easy to tell how long a user
has participated in the message board based on the height
of the flower.
For encodings not based on physical reality, simpler is
usually better. For example, the two-tone coloring of
petals is fairly easy to comprehend. But when more than
two colors are used, the display becomes too cluttered.
Also, we have experimented with showing time of posting
based on angular position of petals, but this produced
irregular flowers that were too complex to compare at a
glance.

Figure 10 b) A more democratic group
(http://www.usscreen.com/message/general/, July ’99)
with a large number of initial posts in magenta. Height
denotes how long a user has been at the board.

How does PeopleFlower scale as the number of posts for a
given user increases? We found that the petals can still be
distinguished clearly when the ends of adjacent petals are
more than one pixel apart. However, pistils representing
responses cannot overlap, or the result would be illegible.
One solution would be to use each petal to represent the
average or median value of multiple data objects.
Since our visualization is based on users’ actual history, we
need to be concerned with their privacy. The visualizations
presented here use only publicly available posting histories.
For more sensitive information, a possible solution is to not
specify user identity, or use only pseudonyms. Our
visualization can still show patterns about an interaction
environment without identifying individuals.
8. APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

PeopleGarden can be readily applied to other threaded
discussion space such as Usenet newsgroups. It can also be
applied to other interaction spaces such as chat rooms with
some modifications. One small difference is that there are
no clear distinction between initial post and response. We
can use instead different categorizations of chat messages
such as question versus a statement. A related application is
representing users’ traversal history through a Web site.
There are several directions of future work for
PeopleGarden. We would like to conduct formal user
testing for more detailed answers about which encoding
works best for people and further evolve our designs.
We would like to dynamically update PeopleFlowers of
users in Web boards, and chat rooms. One can watch the
growth of a PeopleGarden over time as users interact more
with each other.
9. CONCLUSION

To interact effectively on-line, one needs to know about
other participants. Unfortunately, existing interaction
environments require extensive participation for users to
form a holistic view of the interaction context. We believe
that these environments can be enhanced by re-introducing
the social context present in physical interactions.
We have presented the data portrait as a novel method for
conveying information about participants of an on-line
environment. PeopleFlower visualizes a user’s posting
history: PeopleGarden uses a collection of these flowers to
represent users of a message board. The various views of
PeopleGarden can be used to successfully answer user
questions about the board. PeopleGarden can be extended
to other on-line environments to illustrate their social
context. We believe that these data portraits can help users
to understand an interaction space, see how it changes over
time, and provide a mirror for the level and nature of the
interaction in that space.

Color pictures and an actual demo can be found at
http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~becca/papers/pgarden
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Eric Brittain, Neel Master, Ramesh Raskar, and
Roy Rodenstein for their helpful discussions.
REFERENCES

[Ahlberg94] Ahlberg, C. and B. Shneiderman, Visual
information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query
filters with starfield displays. Proceedings of CHI '94.
[Arnheim89] Arnheim, R., Visual Thinking, University of
California Press, 1989.
[Art97] The Art Book, London: Phaidon Press, 1997.
[Benford95] Benford, S., J. Bowers, L.E. Fahlén, C.
Greenhalgh, and D., Snowdon, User embodiment in
collaborative virtual environments, Proceedings of
CHI ’95.
[Brilliant93] Brilliant, R., Portraiture, Harvard University
Press, 1993.
[Card99] Card, S.K., J.D. MacKinlay (ed.), B.,
Shnieiderman (ed.), Readings in Information
Visualization: Using Vision to Think, Morgan
Kaufman, 1999.
[Deja99] Deja News Web site, http://www.deja.com/,
1999.
[Damer97] Damer, B., Avatars! : Exploring and Building
Virtual Worlds on the Internet , Peachpit Press, 1997.
[Donath95] Donath, J., Visual Who: Animating the
affinities and activities of an electronic community, at
ACM Multimedia 95, Nov 5-9, San Francisco, CA.
[Donath99] Donath, J., K. Karahalios, and F. Viegas,
"Visualizing conversations". In Proceedings of HICSS
32, January 5-8, 1999.
[Harris97] Harris, R. L., Information Graphics: A
Comprehensive Illustrated Reference: Visual Tools for
Analyzing,
Managing,
and
Communicating,
Management Graphics, 1997.
[Jefferies97] Jeffery, C., “A menagerie of program
visualization techniques”, in Software Visualization:
Programming as a Multimedia Experience, MIT Press,
1997.
[Kautz98] Kautz, H and B. Selman, Creating Models of
Real-World Communities with ReferralWeb, Working
notes of the Workshop on Recommender Systems,
held in conjunction with AAAI-98, Madison, WI,
1998.
[Kowalski99] Kowalski, M., Markosian, L., et al, ArtBased Rendering of Fur, Grass, and Trees, in
SIGGRAPH 99.

[Krebs96] Krebs, V., Visualizing Human Networks,
Release 1.0, 12 February 1996.
[Kurlander96] Kurlander, D., T. Skelly, and D. Salesin,
“Comic chat”, Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ’96.
[Milgram67] Milgram, S. The Small World Problem,
Psychology Today, 1 1967.
[Moreno36] Moreno, J. Who Shall Survive: Foundations of
Sociometry, Group Psychotherapy, and Sociodrama,
New York: Beacon Press.
[Plaisant96] Plaisant, C., et al., LifeLines: Visualizing
personal histories, In Proceedings of CHI '96.
[Rankin98] Rankin, P.J. et al, Star Cursors in Content
Space: Abstractions of People and Places, In Technical
Sketches of SIGGRAPH ’98.
[Raskar99] Raskar, R. and M. Cohen, "Image Precision
Silhouette Edges", Symposium on Interactive 3D
Graphics, Atlanta GA, April 1999.

[Smith99] Smith, M., "Invisible Crowds in Cyberspace:
Measuring
and
Mapping
the
USENET",
Communities in Cyberspace , Routledge, 1999.
[Terveen98] Terveen, L., and W. Hill, Finding and
Visualizing Inter-site Clan Graphs, Proceedings of
CHI '98.
[Tufte90] Tufte, E.R., Envisioning Information, Graphics
Press, 1990.
[Viegas99] Viegas, F., and J. Donath, "Chat Circles", in
Proceedings of CHI ‘99.
[Wellman79] Wellman, B., The Community Question: The
Intimate Networks of East Yorkers, American Journal
of Sociology, 84, 1979.
[Whittaker98] Whittaker, S., L. Terveen, W. Hill, L.
Cherny, The Dynamics of Mass Interaction, CSCW
’98.

