arXiv:1704.03330v2 [physics.soc-ph] 14 Apr 2017

Food-bridging: a new network construction to
unveil the principles of cooking
Tiago Simas⇤1,2 , Michal Ficek1 , Albert Diaz-Guilera3,4 ,
Pere Obrador1 , and Pablo R. Rodriguez1
1

Telefonica Research, Edificio Telefonica, Barcelona, Spain
2
Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
3
Departament de Fisica de la Materia Condensada, Marti i
Franques 1, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
4
Universitat de Barcelona Institute of Complex Systems
(UBICS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
April 17, 2017

Abstract
In this manuscript we propose, analyse, and discuss a possible
new principle behind traditional cuisine: the Food-bridging hypothesis
and its comparison with the food-pairing hypothesis using the same
dataset and graphical models employed in the food-pairing study by
Ahn et al. [1].
The Food-bridging hypothesis assumes that if two ingredients do
not share a strong molecular or empirical affinity, they may become
affine through a chain of pairwise affinities. That is, in a graphical
model as employed by Ahn et al., a chain represents a path that joints
the two ingredients, the shortest path represents the strongest pairwise
chain of affinities between the two ingredients.
⇤

Email: tiago.simas@telefonica.com

1

Food-pairing and Food-bridging are di↵erent hypotheses that may
describe possible mechanisms behind the recipes of traditional cuisines.
Food-pairing intensifies flavour by mixing ingredients in a recipe with
similar chemical compounds, and food-bridging smoothes contrast between ingredients. Both food-pairing and food-bridging are observed
in traditional cuisines, as shown in this work.
We observed four classes of cuisines according to food-pairing and
food-bridging: (1) East Asian cuisines, at one extreme, tend to avoid
food-pairing as well as food-bridging; and (4) Latin American cuisines,
at the other extreme, follow both principles. For the two middle
classes: (2) Southeastern Asian cuisines, avoid food-pairing and follow
food-bridging; and (3) Western cuisines, follow food-pairing and avoid
food-bridging.

1

CUISINE

BRIDGING

Western cuisine

o

East Asia

x

x

Southeastern Asia

o

x

Latin American

o

o

Introduction

Since the introduction by Francois Benzi and Heston Blumenthal of the Foodpairing hypothesis, a debate on this hypothesis has been risen in gastronomy
science and cuisine. Originally it states that, if two ingredients share important flavour compounds1 , there is a good chance that they will result in
a tasty combination, [1, 2]. In the last few years, this hypothesis attracted
foodies, many chefs, and scientists. If food-pairing is one of the main principles behind our taste preferences, scientifically this would allow us to predict
and build many successful new ingredient affinities based on which flavours
they are composed.
Ahn et al. [1], present a study of the food-pairing hypothesis across
several regional cuisines, employing a set of tools which derive from a new
scientific field: complex networks, a sub-field of complex systems [4]. These
mathematical techniques were applied to several regional cuisines, to encode
a relation between ingredients and flavours as a network, where nodes and
edges represent ingredients and flavours sharing respectively. This network is
called flavour network from now on. The authors have observed that Western
cuisines show a tendency towards the food-pairing hypothesis, i.e. their
flavour network contains many pairs of ingredients that share many flavour
compounds, and that Eastern Asian cuisines tend to avoid compound sharing
1
By flavour compounds we mean molecular chemical compounds and from now on will
describe these as flavours compounds or, in short, flavours.

2

PARING

x

ウイスキーとアプリコットは化学的に遠いがトマトを間に入れると近くなる（become affine, or have strong affinitiy)

between ingredients. The study of food-pairing has lately been applied to
other specific regional cuisines [5, 6, 7].
The hypothesis of food-bridging stems from the combination of the theory
of complex networks and gastronomy [1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 12, 13]. It assumes that
if two ingredients do not share a strong molecular or empirical affinity, they
may become affine through a chain of pairwise affinities. That is, apricot and
whiskey gum may not be affine,
but if we join (or bridge) them with tomato
affine = 親戚
they may become affine – assuming that tomato is affine with apricot and
whiskey gum, thus creating a chain of affinities. In a graphical model of a
flavour network this corresponds to a path that joints the two ingredients,
but not necessarily the shortest path. However, the shortest path represents
the strongest pairwise chain of affinities between the two ingredients.
In this manuscript we analyse and discuss the food-bridging hypothesis
with a restriction to the optimal case, which corresponds to the shortest
path in the graphical model. We use the same dataset and graphical models
employed in the study of Ahn et al. [1]. This allows us to perform a direct
comparative study between food-pairing and food-bridging.

2
2.1

重みの最大値で割っても
ネットワーク構造は変化しない

Methods and Materials
Data and Ingredient Networks

The data used in this work as well as the methods employed to build ingredient networks, are based on the work of Ahn et. al. [1]. In short, the
flavour network is a weighted graph obtained from a bi-partite graph that relates 1530 ingredients with 1106 flavour compounds [1]. Nodes in the flavour
network represent the ingredients, edge weights are the number of flavours
compounds shared between pairs of ingredients [1].
We removed some regional cuisines from the original work [1]. The reason behind is that we employed the null-model Frequency-conserving described in the supplementary materials [1], and after a permutation test and
multi-comparison correction (False Discovery Rate), they show evidence of
no statistical di↵erence when compared with the null-model on the variables:
food-pairing and food-bridging.
In general, the weights of a weighted network lie in a non-normalised
interval Zij 2 [a, b] ⇢ R. Normalising the network weights to the unit
interval I = [0, 1] does not a↵ect network properties, if the normalisation

Flavour network: 1530の食材と1106の化学物質にたいして、食材をノード、食材間のaffinityをエッジとしたグラフ。エッジの重みがエッジ両端の食材が共有している「化学物質の数」

3

is performed by a linear function. As shown in [9] there is only one unique
linear function that performs such normalisation.
wij =

(1

2✏)Zij + (2✏ 1) · M IN (Zij )
+✏
M AX(Zij ) M IN (Zij )

(1)

We have parameterise this function with ✏ in order to avoid merging and/or
isolating vertices with weights at the boundaries of Zij 2 [a, b]. In general ✏
is set to 0.01.
This normalisation allows us to apply the framework described in [9],
i.e. allows us to treat weighted graphs as mathematical objects defined in
a specific algebra, similar to the way in which we use algebras to deal with
numbers.
[9]で提案されたネットワークの数学モデルを適用するためにflavour networkを正規化した

2.2

Food-pairing, Food-bridging and Flavour Network
Semi-metricity

Food-pairing . As defined in [1] Food-pairing is measured by the number
of flavours a pair of ingredients share. The food-pairing value of a recipe is
the average number of shared flavours in the recipe, as defined in [1] and is
calculated from the following equation:
レシピの評価式。エッジの重みの平均＝全ての食材間で
Ns (R) =

SubNetwork

X

2

Recipe

nR (nR

number of ings in recipe

共有している化学物質の数を食材数で割ったもの、と
言っているが、間違ってる気がスル

edge

1) i,j2R,i6=j

|Ci \ Cj |

(2)

where Ck corresponds to the edge weight between the pair of ingredients
in the flavour network, and nR is the number of ingredients in the recipe
R. Each recipe defines a sub-graph in the flavour network and Ns (R) corresponds to the average of all edges in such sub-graph.
Metric and Semi-metric edges and paths. As defined in [13, 12, 9, 11,
= 計量可能 = エッジが存在する
15, 14, 10], an edge in a weighted graph is metric if the shortest path is equal metric
semi-metric = 準計量可能 = エッジが存在しない
ので最短距離を計算する
to the edge by itself (direct connection). Otherwise the edge is considered
semi-metric, which means that there is at least one alternative path that
involves other nodes. See figure 1 for an example.
We may observe in a network of ingredients that two nodes are more
strongly connected by other paths (semi-metric paths), whether or not there
is a direct edge between them. Figure 1 shows an example of the combination of ”garlic” and ”strawberry” from the flavour network, which share 5
4

親和性＝affinityが弱いペアに
３つめの食材を入れて親和性を
向上させる

flavours when mixed together. In this figure we show how we may increase
the poor affinity between these two ingredients by adding additional ingredients that play in the semi-metric paths of the flavour network. From the
flavour network, at least two semi-metric paths are stronger than the edge
that connects them. In this case, among the possible stronger paths, the optimal semi-metric path is the path that indirectly connects the two ingredients
in this network; that is, the path ”garlic + roasted onion + bantu beer +
strawberry”. These intermediate ingredients potentiate the affinity between
”garlic - strawberry”. Other semi-metric paths may exist as we show in this
example: ”garlic + roast beef + strawberry”.
Food-pairing is a particular case for which we only consider direct connections, if they exist. In another words k = 0 hops (zero nodes in between).
However, with semi-metric paths we allow two ingredients to be strongly
connected with k > 0 hops, whether the edge between the ingredients exists
or not.
There are many ways to calculate such alternative paths between any two
nodes in a weighted graph. Refer to the Figure 1 in [15] for a summary of
this calculation and, see further details in [9, 11, 15, 14, 16].
Food-bridging . Food-briging is a hypothesis which assumes that if two
ingredients do not share a strong molecular or empirical affinity, they may
become affine through a chain of pairwise affinities. That is, apricot and
whiskey gum may not be affine, but if we join (or bridge) them with tomato
they may become affine – assuming that tomato is affine with both apricot
and whiskey gum, thus creating a chain of affinities.
化学物質を共有しない食材グループが存在するためネットワークは分断され、２食材間のパスは見つからないかもしれない

Food-bridging is the ability to connect a pair of ingredients, that may or
may not have a direct connection, through a path of non-repeating ingredients within a network of ingredient affinities; in the specific case of this work
the flavour network. Several paths may exist, or none. In the case that no
path exists, we say that no bridge exists, otherwise a bridge exists and all
possible bridges are ranked by the strength of the path.
The notion of food-bridging is directly related to semi-metric connections
between ingredients in a network of ingredients as briefly mentioned above.
Semi-metricity in weighted graphs is a mathematical property of distance
that measures all levels of triangle inequality violations. That is, all k hop
inequalities violations between two ingredients, where k 1 means that we
5

Figure 1: Semi-metric edge and paths example from the flavour network.
The white edge that links ”garlic + strawberry” shares 5 flavours. Therefore
it is semi-metric, because there are two alternative paths the yellow and orange paths that better overlap flavours or food-pairs based in a chain of other
ingredients, smoothing the initial flavour contrast between these ingredients.
The two semi-metric paths that connect ”garlic-strawberry” are: (1) Yellow
path, with ”garlic + roasted onion + bantu beer + strawberry”, which shares
16+32+88 = 136 flavours; and (2) orange path, with ”garlic + roasted beef
+ strawberry”, which shares 11+63 = 74 flavours. The first semi-metric path
may inspire a ”garlic-strawberry” sauce, based on ”garlic + roasted onion +
bantu beer + strawberry”, and with the second semi-metric path may inspire the dish composed of ”roasted beef” with garlic-strawberry sauce. This
figure is an adapted print screen of the application developed by Telefonica
I+D Appetit Team and available online at http://appetit.lab.tid.es - with
Telefonica I+D printing permission.
have k intermediate ingredients, see Figures 1 and 3(B) for an example.The
degree of food-bridging in a recipe is defined as an average of all semi-metric
edges in a recipe, or by the average strength of all optimal semi-metric paths,
respectively.
degree of food-bridging: semi-metricエッジの平均

6

⇤
More specifically, we define the recipe optimal food-bridging strength Nsm
(R)
as an average of the strengths of all the optimal paths between any pair of
ingredients in the defined recipe sub-graph:
⇤
Nsm
(R) =

where

2
nR (nR

X

1) i,j2R,i6=j
si,j =

(si,j > 1 ^ si,j < +1)
dci,j + 1

(3)

di,j
dci,j

is the semi-metric ratio in the weighted sub-graph defined by the recipe R
in the flavour network [9, 11, 15, 14]: di,j is the direct distance and dci,j
denotes the shortest path between ingredients i and j, respectively. is the
discrete-Kronecker function, i.e. (condition) = 1, if the logical condition
T rue, otherwise (condition)P
= 0 – for logical condition equals False. That
is, the equation numerator;
i,j (si,j > 1 ^ si,j < +1), counts only the
semi-metric edges.
⇤
Although we define the recipe optimal food-bridging strength Nsm
(R), in
this work we measure the degree of food-bridging in a recipe as the average
of all semi-metric edges in a recipe, which represents a simpler version.
Network semi-metric percentage. As defined in [9, 11, 15, 14] the network semi-metric percentage is given by the following equation:
P
i,j (si,j > 1 ^ si,j < +1)
SM P = P
(4)
1 ^ si,j < +1)
i,j (si,j

where si,j is the semi-metric ratio betweenPingredients i and j in the flavour
network. The dominator of this equation; i,j P(si,j 1 ^ si,j < +1) counts
all edges in the network and the numerator;
i,j (si,j > 1 ^ si,j < +1),
counts only the semi-metric edges.
Recipe food-bridging percentage. Semi-metric percentage of the subgraph representing a recipe in the ingredient network is called recipe foodbridging percentage. In other words, Equation 4 above is applied to the
sub-graph defined by the recipe.
Network metric backbone. As defined in [9, 11, 15, 14] the metric backbone is the smallest weighted sub-graph of a weighed graph that preserves
7

the shortest paths: sub-graph with all metric edges.
Network semi-metric backbone. The semi-metric backbone is a subgraph of a weighted graph with only semi-metric edges, i.e. all metric edges
removed from the network [11, 15].

3

Results

In Figure 2 we analysed food-pairing and optimal food-bridging (semi-metric
percentage) according to equations 2 and 4, respectively. We plotted the averages of these variables for each of the seven distinct world regions, against
how they rank, (Figure 2 (A) and (C)), and against the number of ingredients, (Figure 2 (B) and (D)).

使われる食材数が
増えるとfoodparing仮説が成り立
ち温くなる

Food-pairing : In Figures 2 (A) and (B) we observe that there are clearly
two distinct groups with respect to food-pairing: Western-based cuisines;
and Eastern Asian cuisines. It corroborates with the observations in [1, 2, 5]
that Eastern Asian cuisines avoid food-pairing more than the Western based
cuisines. Moreover, from Figure 2 (B), we observe that there is a negative
trend of food-pairing against the average number of ingredients used in a
recipe. Note that in this case, East Asian and Southeast Asian cuisines di↵er
mainly in the average number of ingredients used in a recipe. East Asian
cuisine is a complete outlier in this trend – flagging that Southeast Asian
cuisine may di↵er from East Asian cuisine in some other dimension. We
also observe that Eastern European as well as Southeast Asian cuisines show
higher variability, suggesting a richer cuisine. In fact, the source of the variability may stem from a size e↵ect, since these two cuisines present lower
volume of recipes when compared to the others, a collection of 381 and 457
recipes, respectively, with the others containing over 2000 recipes each.

Food-bridging : In Figures 2 (C) and (D) we observe that food-briding
ranks non-linear and depends positively linearly on the average number of
the ingredients used in recipes. From the rank we observe that, in this case,
food-bridging: East and Southeast Asian cuisines di↵er significantly from
each other; Western cuisines cluster together at the bottom extreme; and
Southeast Asian at the other extreme.
8

Food-Pairing
仮説が成り立つ度合い

Food-Bridging
仮説が成り立つ度合い

Food-Bridgingで評価したランキング（国別）

Figure 2: < N (R) > is the average over all recipes of the recipe food-pairing,
< SM P (R) > is the average over all recipes of the recipe food-bridging,
Rank is the sorted cuisine type by < N (R) > or < SM P (R) >, and < n >
the average number of ingredients per recipe for a given cuisine type. (A)
Average recipe Food-pairing (< N (R) >) vs. cuisine type Rank. (B) Average
recipe Food-pairing (< N (R) >) vs. average number of ingredients per recipe
(< n >) . (C) Average recipe Food-bridging (< SM P (R) >) vs. cuisine type
Rank. (D) Average Food-bridging (< SM P (R) >) vs. average number of
ingredients per recipe (< n >).
In this case we note that food-bridging (semi-metric percentage) depends
on the number of ingredients used in a recipe. This was an expected result
since there are more possibilities to bridge ingredients, i.e. more degrees of
freedom.

Food-pairing and Food-bridging : In Figure 3 (A) we observe the relation
9

between food-pairing and food-bridging. We divided the group into four nonoverlapping regions, which represent the following four classes.
1. Low food-pairing + Low food-bridging.
2. Low food-pairing + High food-bridging.
3. High food-pairing + Low food-bridging.
4. High food-pairing + High food-bridging.
We observe that East Asian falls into class (1), Southeast Asian into class
(2), Southern, Eastern, Western European and North American into class (3)
and Latin American into class (4).
In class (1), with low food-pairing and low food-bridging, the recipe ingredients depend less on the co-occurrence of their flavour compounds, directly
or indirectly (chains of pairings). Class (2) pairs flavour compounds mainly
indirectly by chains or bridges between ingredients. In class (3), the ingredients mainly pair their flavour compounds without that many indirect chains
or bridges. In class (4) the ingredients strongly pair and bridge their flavour
compounds.
In Figure 3 (B) we have an example of a SouthEast Asian recipe with
six ingredients2 . We can observe five semi-metric edges (red) and six metric
5
edges (blue). The semi-metric percentage of this recipe is SM P = 5+6
⇥
100% = 45%. It shares in average eleven flavour compounds between pairs
of ingredients, falling into class (2) according to figure 3 (A). Moreover, this
recipe has nine possible semi-metric paths or bridges, where some of them
are shown in the Figure 3 (B).
In Figures 4-5, we show a sub-graph of the flavour network with the top
100 ingredients that have stronger connections or pairings (node strength).
Figure 4 edges represent only metric connections (metric backbone) and Figure 5 edges show only semi-metric connections (semi-metric backbone). Node
colours represent network clusters after applying a community detection algorithm, e.g. Louvain algorithm [17], and node size proportional to the
2

The meaning of general ingredients products from Fenaroli’s book of Flavors [8] is for
example:
fish: sweet fish, fatty fish, raw fatty fish, ...
seed: lovage seed, toasted sesame seed, angelica seed, ...

10

node metric or semi-metric strength, respectively. The metric percentage is
27, 4% of the edges from the flavour network and the semi-metric percentage
is 72, 6% from the flavour network, which demonstrates that there are a high
number of bridge possibilities between pairs of ingredients.
Highly metric ingredients (node size) tend to food-pair in pairs, and highly
semi-metric ingredients (node size) tend to food-pair with the addition of
intermediate ingredients. For example, from Figure 4 the ingredients ”beer”,
”black tea”, ”gruyere cheese” etc, are good food-pairing ingredients. Figure
5 shows that ”port wine”, ”rose wine”, ”tea”, ”tomato” are better mixed
with intermediate ingredients, according to food-bridging hypothesis.
In general, we may observe from Figures 4-5 that there is a dichotomy;
with ingredients that are less suited to food-pairing tending to use the foodbridging mechanism, and vice-versa.

4

Discussion

We have shown that the flavour network is 72, 6% semi-metric, which allows
food-bridging to work extensively, i.e. the number of possible semi-metric
paths between ingredients is large. Food-bridging or semi-metricity, by hypothesis may increase affinities between ingredients with or without a strong
direct affinity based on chain of intermediate ingredient pairings, in this case
a chain of flavour compounds affines.
Food-pairing and food-bridging are di↵erent hypothesis that may represent possible mechanisms behind traditional cuisines. Food-pairing intensifies flavour with similar flavoured ingredients and food-bridging smooths
contrasted flavoured ingredients in a recipe, respectively. Both hypothesis
food-pairing and food-bridging, are jointly observed in traditional cuisines,
as shown in this work.
Regional cuisines cluster in four distinct classes defined by the possible relationship between these two mechanisms. Where East Asian cuisine is at one
extreme class (1), and tends to avoid food-pairing as well as food-bridging;
and Latin American cuisine is at the other extreme class (4), following both
principles. Southeastern Asian and Western cuisines are in middle classes
(2) and (3): class (2) avoids food-pairing and follows food-bridging; class (3)
follows food-pairing and avoids food-bridging.
It is worthwhile noting from figure 3 (A) that the represented cuisine
classes follow in some way their geo-political distribution.
11

Figure 3: < N (R) > is the average over all recipes of the recipe foodpairing, and < SM P (R) > is the average over all recipes of the recipe foodbridging. (A) Classes of cooking based on average recipe Food-pairing (<
N (R) >) versus average recipe Food-bridging (< SM P (R) >) . We divided
the space into four distinct regions or classes, as follows: (1) Low foodpairing + Low food-bridging, (2) Low food-pairing + High food-bridging,
(3) High food-pairing + Low food-bridging, (4) High food-pairing + High
food-bridging. (B) An example of semi-metric analysis of a Southeast Asian
cuisine with six ingredients. The semi-metric percentage of this recipe is
5
SM P = 5+6
⇥ 100% = 45%. It shares in average eleven flavour compounds
between pairs of ingredients, falling into class (2) according to (A). Moreover,
this recipe has nine possible semi-metric paths or bridges, of which some are
shown above.

12

Figure 4: Metric Backbone. Top 100 ingredients of Flavour Network with
higher node strength. Edges represent metric connections and edge colour
the target community colour (target node). Node colours represent network
clusters after applying a community detection algorithm, e.g. Louvain algorithm, and size proportional to the node metric strength.
East Asia cuisine, represented by Korean, Chinese, and Japanese cuisines,
tends to use contrasted ingredients with respect to flavour. This results in a
cuisine that contrasts several flavours.
At the other extreme is Latin American cuisine, represented by Caribbean,
Central America, South American, and Mexican cuisines. These tend to rein-

13

Figure 5: Semi-metric Backbone. Top 100 ingredients of Flavour Network
with higher node strength. Edges represent semi-metric connections and edge
colour the target community colour (target node). Node colours represent
network clusters after applying a community detection algorithm, e.g. Louvain algorithm, and size proportional to the node semi-metric strength.
force the intensity of flavour using both mechanisms, food-pairing and foodbridging. That is, direct and indirect intensification of flavours in a recipe,
reinforcing common flavours and smoothing contrasts between flavoured contrasted ingredients.
In class (2) we found Southeast Asian cuisine, represented by Indonesian,

14

Malaysian, Filipino, Thai, and Vietnamese. These cuisines are similar to East
Asian cuisines with respect to food-pairing, using contrasted ingredients, but
at the same time they smooth these contrasts with other ingredients that
bridge the contrast.
The other intermediate class is class (3), where we found Eastern, Southern, Western European, and North American cuisines. Eastern European
cuisines are represented by Eastern Europe in general, and Russian cuisines.
Southern European cuisine is represented by Greek, Italian, Mediterranean,
Spanish, and Portuguese. Western European cuisine is represented by French,
Austrian, Belgian, English, Scottish, Dutch, Swiss, German, and Irish. And
North American is represented by American in general, Canada, Cajun,
Southern soul food, and Southwestern U.S. These cuisines tend to follow
the food pairing with the direct intensification of flavours in a recipe, avoiding contrasted ingredients. Therefore, these cuisines are characterised by
avoiding flavour contrasted ingredients. Moreover, in this class, at one extreme we have Southern European, and at the other North American. The
latter sub-clustering better with Western and Eastern European cuisines.
We may suggest several explanations for why, in this analysis, traditional
cuisines cluster in this way across these two dimensions: food-pairing and
food-bridging. The clustering aligns well with a geo-political distribution.
These cuisines may be driven by particular geographical weather and resource
constrains as well as political trade in goods, which may influence the di↵erent
styles of cuisine analysed in this work.
Food-bridging, as shown, opens the possibility of better understanding
possible mechanisms behind mixing ingredients in a recipe. This is a new
mechanism or hypothesis, di↵erent from food-pairing, and both mechanisms
are observed in traditional cuisines, in particular in this dataset [1].
We recognise a number of limitations in this work. We have not included
in this analysis important features such as texture, ingredient concentrations,
processes used during the recipes, such as cooking method among others
[3]. We restricted our analysis to the number of shared chemical flavour
compounds between ingredients as in the works of Ahn et al. [1, 2]. However,
for food-bridging, a contra-part of its mathematical representation – semimetricity – is not restricted to the flavour space or more specifically to the
flavour network. In general, it may be employed to other modalities: texture,
colour, among other empirical or scientifically affinities.
Besides this work, semi-metricity as a topological property of weighted
graphs has been shown to be a topological analysis, sensitive and specific
15

in identifying how the flow of information propagates in the human brain
[11, 15], provide better recommendations in social networks [9, 13], and a
better optimisation of large scale graphical algorithms [14].
This work brings a new perspective on food-pairing, and introduces foodbridging as a new principle or vector behind cooking.

Author Contributions
All authors made significant contributions to the drafting of the article.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Telefonica I+D for all support done
in the Appetit project that have turn possible the present work. We also
thank all of our colleagues involved in the Appetit project. We would like to
acknowledge Oliver Smith and Emily Stott for their persistence on editing
this manuscript.

References
[1] Y-Y. Ahn, S.E. Ahnert, J. P. Bagrow, and A-L. Barabasi. Flavor network
and the principles of food pairing. Scientific Reports 1:196 (2011).
[2] Y-Y. Ahn and S.E. Ahnert. The Flavor Network. Leonardo, Vol. 46, No.
3, pp. 272-273, 2013. doi: 10.1162/LEON.a.00569.
[3] Vega C., Ubbink J., and Van der Linden, E. The Kitchen as laboratory:
reflexions on the science of food and cooking. Columbia University Press,
New York, 2012.
[4] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, D.-U. Hwang, Complex
networks: Structure and dynamics, Physics Reports, Volume 424, Issues
4-5, February 2006, Pages 175-308. doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2005.10.009.
[5] Jain A, N K R, Bagler G (2015) Analysis of Food Pairing
in Regional Cuisines of India. PLoS ONE 10(10):
e0139539.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0139539.
16

[6] Kim S, Sung J, Foo M, Jin Y-S, Kim P-J (2015) Uncovering
the Nutritional Landscape of Food. PLoS ONE 10(3): e0118697.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0118697.
[7] Varshney, Kush R., Varshney, Lav R., Wang, Jun, and Myers, Daniel.
Flavor Pairing in Medieval European Cuisine: A Study in Cooking with
Dirty Data. June 30, 2013. arXiv:1307.7982 [physics.soc-ph].
[8] Burdock, G.A. Fenaroli’s handbook of flavor ingredients. CRC Press,
5th edition, 2004.
[9] T. Simas, and L. M. Rocha. Distance Closures on Complex Networks.
Network Science (3) 2 (2015) 227-268. doi:10.1017/nws.2015.11.
[10] Simas T, Chavez M, Rodriguez PR and Diaz-Guilera A (2015) An algebraic topological method for multimodal brain networks comparisons.
Front. Psychol. 6:904. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00904.
[11] Simas T, Chattopadhyay S, Hagan C, Kundu P, Patel A, Holt R, et al.
(2015) Semi-Metric Topology of the Human Connectome: Sensitivity
and Specificity to Autism and Major Depressive Disorder. PLoS ONE
10(8): e0136388. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0136388.
[12] Simas T.M.L.M. Stochastic Models and Transitivity in Complex Networks. Indiana University, May 2012. Ph.D Thesis.
[13] T. Simas and L.M. Rocha. Semi-metric networks for recommender systems. Proceedings of the The 2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint
Conferences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent TechnologyVolume 03, pp. 175-179.
[14] Kalavri V., Simas T. and Logothetis D. The shortest path is not always
a straight line: leveraging semi-metricity in graph analysis. Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment Volume 9 Issue 9, May 2016, Pages 672-683.
doi: 10.14778/2947618.2947623.
[15] Simas T and Suckling J (2016) Commentary: Semi-Metric Topology of the Human Connectome: Sensitivity and Specificity to
Autism and Major Depressive Disorder. Front. Neurosci. 10:353. doi:
10.3389/fnins.2016.00353.
17

[16] D. B. Johnson, Efficient algorithms for shortest paths in sparse networks.
Journal of the ACM 24 (1977) 1-13,
[17] Santo Fortunato (2010) Community detection in graphs, Physics Reports, Volume 486, Issues 3?5, February 2010, Pages 75-174, ISSN 03701573, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2009.11.002.

18

