HUMAN-COMPUTERINTERACTION, 1996, Volume 11, pp. 97-124
Copyright 0 1996, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

When the Interface Is a Face
Lee Sproull and Mani Subramani
Boston University

Sara Kiesler
Carnegie Mellon University

Janet H. Walker and Keith Waters
Digital Equipment Corporation

ABSTRACT
People behave differently in the presence of other people than they do when
they are alone. People also may behave differently when designers introduce
more human-like qualities into computer interfaces. In an experimental study
we demonstrate that people's responses to a talking-face interface differ from
their responses to a text-display interface. They attribute some personality

Lee Sproull is a sociologist interested in the social implications of new
computing technologies; she is a Professor of Management at Boston University. Mani Subramani is a doctoral candidate in Management Information
Systems at Boston University; his research interests are the im lications of
information technologies for the design of work in organizations. ara Kiesler
is a social psychologist who studies social aspects of computer-based technology; she is a Professor of Social and Decision Sciences and a Member of the
Human Computer Interaction Institute at Carne 'e Mellon University.Janet
H. Walker is a psychologist interested in visu media; at the time of this
work, she was a Member of Research Staff at the Digital Equipment Corporation Cambridge Research Laboratory. Keith Waters is a computer scientist
with interests in com uter graphics, multimedia, and computer vision; current1 he is a Consu ting Engineer at the Digital Equipment Corporation
Cam ridge Research Laboratory.

f

f

r,

7

98

SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS
CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCIION
2. THEORETICAL PRALEmVOblg AND HYPOTHESES
3. OVERWEW OF STUDY
4. METHOD
4.1. Subjects
4.2. Apparatus and Display Manipulation
4.3. Procedure
4.4. Measures
5. RESULTS
5.1. Check on Manipulation of Talking-Face Expression
5.2. Social Perception of Question Asker
5.3. Arousal and Attention to Performance
5.4. Self-Presentation
5.5. Differences Between Men and Women Across Conditions
6. DISCUSSION

APPENDIX

traits to it; they are more aroused by it; they present themselves in a more
positive light. We use theories of person perception, social facilitation, and
self-presentation to predict and interpret these results. We suggest that as
computer interfaces become more "human-like," people who use those interfaces may change their own personas in response to them.

This work explores the implications of designing computer interfaces to
look or act more as people do. People act differently in the presence of
other people than they do when they are alone. They pay attention to
those people; they work harder; they present themselves in a more positive light. If this phenomenon extends to people in the presence of "human-like" computers, then as interfaces display more human-like
characteristics, people who use those interfaces may change their own
behavior in response to them.
Technologists have aspired to humanize computer interfaces for a long
time. Humanizing interfaces entails making them more humane, in the
sense of easier and more comfortable to use (Lawel, 1990; Shneiderman,
1987). Humanizing may also entail "humanifymg," in the sense of embodying such human-like attributes as speech (Eichenwdd, 1986), speech
recognition (Itou, Hayamizu, & Tanaka, 1992), and social intelligence
(Binnick, Westbury, & Servan-Schreiber, 1989; Resnick & Lammers,

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

99

1985). Adding more human-like attributes presumably makes interacting
with the interface more satisfymg-because it is more "natural," because it
is emotionally more satisfying, or both. This assumption can be problematic, of course-consider, for example, the case of talking seatbelts in automobiles, which auto makers removed because of customer dissatisfaction.
Because the human face is such a powerful signal of human identity,
adding human faces to interfaces holds promise for interface designers to
make interfaces more human-like. There is some history of using human
face icons and human faces in interfaces (Laurel, 1990; Takeuchi & Nagao,
1993; Thorisson, 1993).A well-known instance is "Phil," a semi-intelligent
agent that appeared in Apple Computer Company promotional videotapes (although it has not yet appeared in any products). Exploration of
human-like interfaces has been limited to date by technology barriers but
this situation is changing because the base technology needed to implement a variety of personable interfaces is advancing rapidly. With a
combination of speech synthesis technology (commercially available) and
facial animation (in research prototype), it is possible to display a synthetic
talking face on a workstation screen (e.g., Waters, 1987; Waters & Levergood, 1993). The face display is an image of a human face with the mouth
animated in synchrony with speech delivered from an audio subsystem
driven by a text-to-speech conversion algorithm. The animated face display with synchronized audio output has the likeness of a talking face. The
talking face can speak arbitrary text and can participate more or less fully
in an interaction with a user, depending on the underlying programming.
The talking face could simply provide a stylized greeting and introduce
the user to a more conventional interface. Alternatively, the face could
represent the computer side of an entire interaction, speaking all words
that would otherwise be displayed on the screen as text and responding to
the user orally instead of via text.
Interestingly, increasing the "humanness" of an interface by adding
more human qualities to it does not necessarily make people like it more.
For example, in one experimental study, users criticized "human-like"
error messages more than they did "computer-like" error messages (Resnick & Lammers, 1985). In an interface design effort, developers of navigation agents for a large hypertext historical database used icons of
historical characters to provide paths through the database. Users overgeneralized from the character icons to expect them to have personality,
motivation, and emotion, and were disappointed when they did not (Oren,
Salomon, & Kreitman, 1990). In a precursor to the study reported here,
Walker, Sproull, and Subramani (1994) administered questionnaires to
people using either a text display or one of two talking-face displays to ask
the questions. They found that people interacting with a talking face
display spent more time, made fewer mistakes, and wrote more comments
than did people interacting with the text display. However, people who
interacted with the more expressive face liked the face and the experience

100 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS
less than people who interacted with the less expressive face. At least some
of the time, trying to make interfaces more like humans apparently results
in disconcerting users, if not actuaily confusing or displeasing them. Instead of assuming that more human is always better, it is important to
understand how people interpret and react to different human qualities
embodied in interfaces. This work draws on social psychological theories
of how people behave in the presence of others to investigate their response to a talking-face display.

The human face is one of the most powerful human referents. Newborns exhibit a preference for face-like patterns over other pakterns (Bond,
1972); infants begin to differentiate specifk visual features of the face by
the age of 2 months (Morton &Johnson, 1991). Faces can induce appropriate behavior in social situations and covering people's faces with masks
can produce inappropriate behavior (Deiner, Fra~er,Beman, & Kelem,
1976). Faces, particularly attractive ones, even sell soap. That is, physically
attractive models are found to be effective in improving people's responses
to advertisements (Baker & Churchill, 1977).
Faces signal social identity by providing cues to emotion and personality (Ekman, 1982; Warner & Sugarman, 1986). When an observer sees a
person's face, the observer can "read" emotion states such as surprise,
happiness, anger, fear, or disgust and some personality attributes such as
friendliness or optimism (but not other personality aspects such as dominance or activity). These readings are reliably consistent across multiple
observers looking at the same faces (Ekman, 1982; Warner & Sugarman,
1986). Facial appearance also influences expectations for interaction (Hilton & Darley, 1991; Snyder, 1984).When people see a happy, friendly face
they expect to have a more enjoyable interaction than when they see an
unhappy, unfriendly one. Facial appearance is used (sometimes inappropriately) as an overall indicator of a person's goodness and competence
(Berscheid & Walster, 1974). Facial appearance and facial expression can
set off a self-fulfilling prophecy, whereby people's biased responses to
appearance cues elicit responses that then reinforce their own expectations.
Previous research on physical appearance suggests that appearance
elicits social perceptions related to personality and emotion, which in turn
affect social behavior. Therefore, to investigate if people change their
behavior in the presence of a talking-face display, we fist asked if people
would attribute personality attributes such as friendliness or pessimism to
it, even though the display was of a synthetic face. In experimental studies
of personality attribution, subjects often are exposed to stimuli such as a
1-min tape recording of a person's voice, a single slide of a person's face,
or a 1-min video of a person talking. Subjects do not interact with the
stimulus persons but judge their personality by rating them on multiple

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE
dimensions of personality on the basis of initial exposure. These studies
have documented that information about personality attributes is conveyed differentially by different information sources such as facial appearance, voice, and body gestures (O'Sullivan, Ekman, Friesen, & Scherer,
1985; Warner & Sugarman, 1986). For instance, sociability is conveyed
better by facial appearance than by voice; activity or energy level is
conveyed better by voice than by appearance. Thus, our first hypothesis is:
H1. People will differentially attribute appearance-linked personality
attributes rather than non-appearance-linked ones to a talking-face
display as compared with a text display.
The mere presence of another human being can influence a person's
behavior substantially. The presence of another person usually serves to
increase arousal on the part of someone asked to perform a task (Zajonc,
1965). It leads people to attend more to the social situation and may
increase evaluation apprehension and task motivation. Deemed the 'social
facilitation effect," this response can lead to improved performance, if the
task is simple, or to degraded performance if it is complex (Holroyd,
Westbrook, Wolf, & Badhorn, 1978; Zajonc, 1965). If people are cued to
behave socially by a talking-face display, as they are by a real person, then
we would expect to see the social facilitation effect in this situation. Hence
our second hypothesis is:
H2a. People will be more aroused when interacting with a talking-face
display than with a text display.
H2b. People will be more attentive when the task is presented by a
talking-face display than when it is presented by a text display.
The presence of other people generally also leads people to present
themselves in a positive light. For example, face-to-face interviews elicit
more socially desirable self-reports of behavior such as wearing seat belts
or voting in elections than do paper-and-pencil questionnaires asking the
same questions (Bradburn, 1983). Face-to-faceinterviews also elicit fewer
reports of socially undesirable behavior such as drug abuse or alcohol
consumption (Waterton & Duffy, 1984). If people are cued to behave
socially by a talking-face display as they are by a real person, then we
would expect people to present themselves in a positive light when interacting with the display. Hence our third hypothesis is:
H3a. People will present themselves in a more positive light when
interacting with a talking-face display than when interacting with a
text display.

I02 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS
H3b. People will be more guarded in their revelations to a talking-face
display than to a text display.
There is substantial evidence that, during interaction, men and women
are differentially aware of and sensitive to social cues such as facial
expressions (Hall, 1979). Therefore, our fourth hypothesis is:
H4. Men and women will differ more from one another in their responses to a talking-face display than in their response to a text
display.

3. OVERVIEW OF STUDY
The study reported here experimentally investigated people's responses
to an ostensible computer-based career counseling system. The subjects
answered psychological test items and described themselves and their
interests to an interactive career counselor program. The interface through
which the subjects interacted with the system was either a talking-face
display or a text display.
The general context of the study, the interview survey, is a familiar one
and one with an extensive literature on how the nature of the experience
affects people's responses (Bailey, Moore, & Bailar, 1987; Schuman &
Presser, 1981). Generally, surveys elicit social responses in much the same
way as do other social contexts. Surveys delivered by human agents in
face-to-face or telephone interviews are more socially involving than those
delivered by paper and pencil. Thus response rates are higher; people give
a greater quantity of information. But social involvement also can lead to
social posturing; surveys delivered by human agents elicit more biased
reports of socially desirable and undesirable behavior. We reasoned that
our hypotheses could be tested in the context of a computer survey. We
predicted more appearance-linked attribution and more social facilitation
(arousal; attentiveness to the situation) in the presence of a talking-face
survey interview than a text survey interview. We predicted that subjects
would present themselves more positively in a survey interview delivered
by a talking-face display than in an interview delivered by a text display.
In order to rule out the possibility that a particular facial expression
caused the predicted effects, we used two different talking faces-one with
a relatively stern expression and one with a relatively pleasant one-each
derived from the same underlying image. We predicted subjects in both
face conditions would differ from those in the text-display condition.
Different expressions might elicit different responses from people. For
example, people might like a pleasant face more than a stern face but they
might perceive the stern face as more judgmental and perform more
carefully for a stern face than for a pleasant one. We did not develop
hypotheses about specific differences in response to different expressions

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

103

because previous research does not imply clear directional predictions
regarding appearance-linked attributes, arousal and attention, or disclosure. 1 In this experiment, the pleasant and stern faces were used as
empirical replications of the talking-face display rather than investigated
in their own right.

4. METHOD
The experiment was a 3 (Display) x 2 (Gender) between-subjects factorial design with 130 subjects randomly assigned to three display conditions. The display presented fmed-response and open-ended questions in
a window on a computer screen either through text, through a talking face
with a pleasant expression, or through a talking face with a stern expression. Approximately equal numbers of men and women were assigned to
each condition.

4.1. Subjects
Subjects were Boston University students whose participation was solicited by fliers posted on campus seeking volunteers to "try out a prototype
computer-based career counseling system." Subjects' mean age was 20.7
years; 76% reported English as their native language; their self-report of
typing skill was 3.0 on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (very slow) to 5 (very
fast). Men and women did not statistically significantly differ on any of
these characteristics.

4.2. Apparatus and Display Manipulation
The computer workstation was a Digital Equipment Corporation Alpha
AXP, with built-in telephone-quality audio and externally powered speakers. The workstation was running OSF Version 1.1, a software implementation of the DECtalk text-to-speech algorithm, and DECface for the
animated face (Waters & Levergood, 1994). Face images were displayed in
gray scale. The experimental session was managed using TWTcl (Ousterhout, 1994) and the Lisp facilities of Gnu Emacs.

1. The research on arousal and disclosure in the presence of pleasant versus
stern others did not suggest a clear prediction. For example, there is evidence
people will disclose more information to a pleasant or liked other, but the strength
of the effect depends on whether the other person is well known, also discloses, or
is nonevaluative (Collins & Miller, 1994). Since the talking face was a "stranger,"
did not itself disclose information about itself, and was collecting nonanonymous
information that could be evaluated by a superior, the conditions for an increase
in disclosure to a pleasant face as compared with a stem face were not satisfied.

104 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS
Figure I. Underlying geometric modeL

The face display was produced by texture-mapping an image captured
on videotape onto a geometric wire frame (see Figure 1). The mouth was
animated by computing the mouth posture (viseme) corresponding to the
current linguistic unit (phoneme) and using a cosine-based interpolation to
transit between mouth postures (Waters & Levergood, 1994). The voice
was produced by a software implementation of the KLSYN88 revisions of
the DECtalk text-to-speech algorithm (Klatt & Klatt, 1990). The DECtalk
parameters used a neutral voice in the female pitch range at 160
worddmin (Waters & Levergood, 1994). DECtalk speech is acceptably
comprehensible at this rate (Duffy & Pisoni, 1992).
The pleasant and stern expressions were produced from the facial
model of the neutral face used in Walker et al. (1994). The pleasant
expression (Figure 2, right) was synthesized by slight contractions of the
zygomatic major muscles in the geometric facial model that pull the
corners of the mouth up and the frontalis inner and outer muscles that pull
the eyebrows up (Waters, 1987). The stern expression (Figure 2, left) was
synthesized by slight contractions of the zygomatic minor muscles that

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE
Figure 2. Facer stern (left) and pleasant (right).

pull the corners of the mouth down and the corrugator muscles that pull
the inner portion of the eyebrows in and down. These muscles are known
to be involved in producing pleasant and stern expressions, respectively
(Ekman, 1982). Expression was present only between utterances. During
animation in synchrony with speech, each face returned to the initial
neutral expression. As a result, the expression was identical in both face
conditions during speech. The experimental expression was refreshed
after each corn;,lete utterance. The facial animation software simulated
eye blinking during speech; the face displayed between utterances was
static.
The open-ended questions were delivered in a "counselor interview*
that used the Gnu Emacs implementation of ELIZA (Weizenbaum, 1976),
an interactive program that simulates responses to subject input. The
program consists of a simple table-driven keyword recognizer and response generator. When the subject's input contained a word classified as
being related to academic performance, the program would generate a
question using the word from the input and the next template in the list of
academic-performance-related templates. If none of the words contained

106 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, IUESLER, WALKER, WATERS
in the input had category information, the program chose one from a set
of templates that changed the subject, sometimes returning to an earlier
topic. The categories and templates shipped with Gnu Emacs were modified by removing inappropriate phrases and including a vocabulary relevant to career and lifestyle aspirations. We chose this appraach for its ease
of implementation only; we make no claim of processing natural language.

4.3. Procedure
Each subject completed the study individually in a faculty office
equipped with a computer workstation. The male experimenter introduced the study and told subjects that they were helping the researchers
test a prototype of a computer-based career planning system. Subjects
were told they would answer some standard psychological questions and
some open-ended questions from a computer-baoed career counselor, and
then would complete a questionnaire messing the experience. The experimenter introduced the system by having subjects complete a short
demographic questionnaire and respond to a set of practice items, one in
each of the response formats used in the psychological scales. After assuring that subjects understood how to enter their responses, the experimenter told subjects they could take as long as they wished and left the
room. Figure 3 summarizes how the experiment proceeded across the
different conditions. Note that both the piychological scales and the counselor interaction were presented in one of the experimental conditions of
text display, pleasant talking-face display, or stern talking-fwe display.
Subjects in the text condition first saw a window displaying the text of
instructions on how to record their answers for the first psychological
scale. Items were displayed one at a time as shown in Figure 4 and subjects
used a mouse to click on their chosen response for each item and to go to
the next item. In all conditions the three scales were presented in random
order as were the items within scales. After completing all three psychological scales, subjects saw a text window with a welcoming message from
the "prototype computer career counseling service." This message concluded with the prompt, "Tell me something about yourself." Subjects
typed their response in the lower part of the window in which the counselor's prompt was displayed. The prompt remained visible in the upper
part of the window until the subject finished typing his or her response.
When the subject clicked "go ahead," the counselor's prompt and subject's
response disappeared from the window and the counselor asked another
question ostensibly based on the subject's response. Subjects could continue interacting as long as they wished and were free to terminate this
interaction at any point by clicking on a command button in the window
frame.
In the window corresponding to the text-display window in the text
condition, subjects in the talking-face conditions saw and heard a face

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE
F e r e 3. Flow diagram of experimental procedure.
Introduction to experiment.
Demographic data collected.

Practice session for familiarization
with interface.

I

Practice session for fsmiliarization
with interface.

Standard tests administered by

Standard tests administered

talking face.

in text.

Interaction with counselor using
talking face.

-I-

I

Interaction with counselor using

7
Post-experiment questionnaire.

speaking the same words that had been displayed as text in the text
condition. The appropriate response format for each psychological scale
was then displayed in text identical to that in the text condition and
subjects indicated their answers by clicking with the mouse. The face
remained on the screen while subjects made their response and then asked
the next question. In the interview, the face spoke the counselor's side of
the interaction. After a 1-sec delay, the counselor's words were displayed
in text in the top half of the response window and subjects typed in their

I never hesitate to go out of my way to
help someone in trouble.
Social Desirability Question

When I am in a group of people, I have
trouble thinking of the right thing to say.

Self-worth Question

characteristic of me

I
The average person is conceited.

Altruism Question

OK, Next

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

109

response in the bottom half of the window just as in the text condition. The
counselor's face remained on the screen while the subject was entering his
or her text.
After completing the three psychological scales and counselor interview, subjects completed a postexperiment questionnaire about their impressions of "the question asker" and their experience using the prototype
system. The experiment and questionnaire were self-paced; subjects were
free to work as long as they wished. Most subjects completed the session
in less than 45 min. They were then debriefed by the experimenter, given
a packet of career planning materials provided by the university's placement office, and paid $10 for their participation.

4.4. Measures
Social perceptions of the interface (i.e., was it perceived to have personality attributes) were measured in the postexperiment questionnaire by
having subjects complete six scales composed of 33 items about perceptions of the "question asker" drawn from previous studies (Buss & Plomin,
1984; Warner & Sugarman, 1986). Three of the scales (Social Evaluation,
Intellectual Evaluation, and Sociability) measure appearance-linked personality attributes; the other three (Activity, Emotionality, and Potency)
measure non-appearance-linked personality attributes. Social Evaluation,
Intellectual Evaluation, and Potency use 7-point semantic differentials
(e.g., unattractive-attractive); Sociability, Activity, and Emotionality use
5-point Likert scales ranging from 1 (not at all true of thisperson) to 5 (very
true of this person). (See Appendix for items, scale reliabilities, and intercorrelations.)
Arousal was measured in the postexperiment questionnaire by asking
subjects "How relaxed did you feel?" and "How confident did you feel?"
during their use of the system. These items were reverse-scored so that a
higher number would indicate less relaxed and less confident. These
questions are similar to those used in other studies of arousal (Holroyd et
al., 1978; Maslach, 1979).To measure subjects' attention to the experiment,
the system recorded information on how much time subjects spent in each
section of the experiment, the number of items they skipped in the scales,
and the number of words subjects wrote in the counselor task. The number
of interaction turns in the counselor task, also measured automatically by
the system, was used as a control variable.
Self-presentation was measured by subjects' responses to the three
psychological scales. (See Figure 4 for an example of one item from each
scale.) The Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability scale is composed of 33
true/false items. Scores on this scale range from 0 to 33, with a higher
score indicating more social desirability. The Philosophy of Human Nature Altruism scale is composed of twenty 6-point Likert scale items, with
anchors of disagree strongly (coded -3) and agree strongly (coded +3). Scores

110 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS
on this scale can range from -60 to +60, with a higher score indicating
greater altruism. The Texas Social Behavior Inventory of Self-worth is
composed of sixteen 5-point Likert scale items anchored at not at all
(coded 0) and very much (coded 4). Scores on this scale can range from 0 to
64, with a higher score indicating higher self-worth.
The Social Desirability and Altruism scales measure aspects of self-presentation that are susceptible to situational influences (Kiesler & Sproull,
1986; Paulhus, 1991; Wrightsman, 1974). We expected scores to vary by
experimental condition. The Self-worth Inventory is more situationaily
stable (Blascovich & Tomaka, 1991); hence we did not expect scores on
this scale to vary by condition. We used this scale as a covariate in some
analyses to control for self-esteem effects on responses.

5. RESULTS
The data were analyzed using SAS Version 6.07. We tested for overall
differences with one- or two-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) and then
tested for differences between the two faces. Then, in planned contrasts we
used Dunnett's one- or two-tailed (as appropriate) camparisons of treatments with a control to compare each of the face conditions with the text
condition. Subject characteristics of age, first language, and typing skill did
not vary significantly across condition and did not interact with the dependent measures and so were dropped from further analyses. We first
present results for all subjects, then present results separately for men and
women.

5.1. Check on Maaipulatdon of WhgFace Ekpretnion
Some of the main analyses entailed comparing responses to the two
faces. Before doing those comparisons we wanted to know if subjects could
discriminate between the two faces. Twenty-two subjects from the text
condition in the main experiment participsted in a dimriminability test of
the two faces after they had completed the main experiment and postexperiment questionnaire. Hard-copy prints of the two faces were presented
side by side. Subjects were given 46 attribute questions drawn from
previous research on perception of personality attributes and were asked
to indicate, for each question, which of the two faces had more of the
attribute-for example, "Which one is more intelligent?" or "Which one is
happier?" Thirty-three of the questions constituted measures of the same
six personality attribute scales used in the main experiment: Social Evaluation, Intellectual Evaluation, and Potency from Warner and Sugarman
(1986) and Emotionality, Activity, and Sociability from Buss and Plornin
(1984).(The other 13 questions were individual items drawn from separate
studies. A factor analysis of these items did not reveal any interpretable
factors and so they were dropped from the analysis.) A choice of the

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE
pleasant face in response to each question was coded as "In and a choice
of the stern face was coded as "0." The scores for each scale were calculated by averaging responses across all the scale questions. The data were
tested against the null hypothesis of no discrimination between faces
(average score of 0.5) using a t test. Subjects consistently discriminated
between the two faces on the Social Evaluation, 421) = 10.73, p < .001,
Sociability, (1) = 4.3, p < .001, and Emotionality, 421) = 3.8, p < .001,
scales, but did not discriminate on the Intellectual Evaluation, 421) = 0.52,
Activity, 421) = 1.08, and Potency, 421) = 0.39, scales. These results are
consistent with the previous literature for the attributes of social evaluation, sociability, activity, and potency. In previous studies people did not
discriminate faces on the attribute of emotionality, although they did in
this test. In previous studies people did discriminate faces on the attribute
of intelligence, although they did not in this test. We note that this test
demonstrates discriminability for the static faces only; a more rigorous test
would have displayed the talking faces side by side.

5.2. Social Perception of Question Asker
Figure 5 shows that subjects did perceive some personality attributes of
the "question askerndifferently across conditions. The data in Figure 5 are
organized according to the theoretically derived categories of appearancelinked and non-appearance-linked traits from Warner and Sugarman
(1986). We follow Warner and Sugarman in reporting Social Evaluation
and Sociability separately, even though they are correlated at .56. Combining them into a single factor does not change the results. ANOVAs
yielded significant A for Social Evaluation, J(2, 118) = 5.85, p < .01;
Sociability, q 2 , 118) = 3.39, P < .05; and Activity, q 2 , 118) = 3.93, P < .05.
Subjects did not differentiate the interfaces on Intelligence, Potency, or
Emotionality. Planned contrasts revealed no statistically significant differences in the perception of attributes between the two faces.
Subjects perceived the faces differently from the text on the appearance-based personality attributes of sociability and social evaluation,
which is consonant with our first hypothesis. (Note that a lower Social
Evaluation, Intellectual Evaluation, or Potency score means that subjects
perceived that attribute more negatively, not that the stimulus had less of
the attribute.) Subjects did not make different attributions of intelligence,
as previous research had led us to predict. Previous research on appearance-based personality attributions typically elicits first impressions of
personality with no or little interaction; in this study, the prolonged
interaction with the "question asker" could have attenuated any initial
differential intelligence attributions. That subjects differentially rated the
interface on the attribute of activity also was unexpected. In previous
studies, the personality attribute of activity was shown to be better conveyed by voice than by facial appearance. Both of the face conditions in

112 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER,WATERS

Perception
Appearance-linked attributes
Social evaluation
1 = negative, 7 = Positive
Sociability
1 = not at all true, 5 = ony true
Intellechd evaluation
1 = negative, 7
Non-appearance-linkedattributes
Potency
1 = negative, 7 = positive
Activity
1 = not at all but, 5 = very true
Emotionality
1 = not at all true, 5 = acry true

Text
( n = 43)

F'leasant Face
( n = 44)

Stern Face
(n=43)

4.17

3.42'

3.29'

5.85**

3.34

3.04

2.74+

3.39*

4.88

4.73

5.08

0.85

4.6

4.4

4.5

0.2

3.33

2.84'

2.90'

3.93'

2.82

2.69

2.79

0.36

q2,118 to
2,119)

No&. Cells with differ by at leastp < .05 from the text condition, which is used as a control
in Dunnett's planned contrast 1 test with (gS ranging from 118 to 119.
*p < .05. **P < .01.
+

this study included (the same) voice. Thus, differentiating "faces" from text
on the personality attribute of activity is consistent with previous research,
if subjects were using voice (in the two face conditions) as their cue to
activity. Although perhaps paradoxical that the diiplay with an animated
face was rated as lower on the activity dimension than the text display,
perhaps the subjects thought the face-based question asker was (relatively)
slow paced and unenergetic.

5.3. Arousal and Attention to Performance
Factor analysis of attitude items from the postexperiment questionnaire
that assessed subjects' experience in the experiment revealed three clear
interpretable factors (see Figure 6). There were no differences across
conditions in the factor we label H@fiincss (Factor l), which we interpret
as a measure of general affect or mood while subjects were participating.
Also, there were no differences across conditions in the factor we label
Enjoyment (Factor 3), which we interpret as a measure of how much
subjects enjoyed the overall experience. However, consistent with our
second hypothesis, there were significant differences across conditions in
the factor we label Arousal (Factor 2), which is a measure of relaxation and
assurance. People reported themselves to be less relaxed and assured in
the face conditions than in the text condition, q2, 119)= 3.64, p < .01.
To examine differences in attentiveness to the experiment, we measured
the time subjects took to complete the psychological scales and the

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE
Figare 6 Fa*

113

analylir of affltnde item8 about interacting with computer dirplay.

I tem
How satisfied were you?
How happy were you?
How much like to continue?
How much like participating?
How relaxed were you?
How confident were you?
Percent of variance explained

Factor 1
(Happiness)

Factor 2
(Arousal)

Factor 3
(Enjoyment)

,86667
37135
-.00544
.35401
.07671
.26205
33

.06041
.I9513
.09073
.08058
.88579
.79803
25

.06674
.08655
.89989
.77853
.07799
.09018
24.5

number of questions they answered (or skipped) in these scales. Subjects
in the face conditions spent more time (M= 19.1 min) than did subjects in
the text condition (M = 14.0 min), F(2, 112) = 25.6, P < .01, as shown in
Figure 7. This result supports our hypothesis, in that a longer time to
answer questions bespeaks thinking more carefully about one's answers.
The difference may be partly owing to the 1-sec delay between the end of
an utterance in the face conditions and the display of the answer window
on the screen. However, subtracting 1.15 min from the overall response
time in the face conditions to remove the effect of the 1-secdelay does not
change the significance of these results. Another reason for the difference
is that it may take longer to listen to a question than to read it. Because we
did not measure reading speed we cannot investigate this possibility.
Subjects in the face conditions skipped more questions across all the
psychological scales (M= 3.3) than did subjects in the text condition (M=
1.9), F(2, 127) = 3.22, P < .05. This difference suggests that subjects were
less careful in the face conditions, but also suggests they were avoiding
certain personal questions. This latter interpretation is supported by analyses showing that subjects in the face conditions skipped significantly more
questions on the two scales known to be susceptible to social influence
(Social Desirability and Altruism) than did subjects in the text condition
but did not differ from subjects in the text condition in the number of
questions they skipped on the scale less susceptible to social influence
(Self-worth).
Thus the results support Hypothesis 2a: subjects reported more arousal
in the face conditions than in the text condition. The results provided
some support for Hypothesis 2b. Subjects took longer to respond in the
face conditions, a finding that may reflect heightened attention (although
we cannot rule out alternative explanations).In the face conditions subjects
had more missing answers (compared with text) on the two scales known to
be subject to social influence but did not have more missing answers
(compared with text) on the scale less susceptible to social influence.

114 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS

Response
Arousala (1 to 7)
Performance on self-presentationscales
Minutes to complete all scales
Number of skipped items overall
Altruism items skipped
Social Desirability items skipped
Self-Worth items skipped
Self-presentation
Altruisma (-60 to +60)

Text
(n = 43)

Pleasant
Face
(n = 44)

Stern
Face
(n = 43)

q2,109 to
2,127)

1.81

2.37'

2.40'

3.64**

Social Desirabilitya (0 to 33)
Self-wortha (0 to 64)
Interaction with counselor
Minutes interacting
Words to counselor
Number of interaction turns

Note. Cell values with + differ by at least p < .05 from the text condition, which is used as a
control in Dunnett's planned contrast t-test.
'More positive score means more of the trait. b~djustedFusing Self-worth as covariate.
*p < .05. **p< 01. ***p< 001.

5.4. Self-Presentation
The Social Desirability score is the sum of responses to 33 social
desirability items (Cronbach's coefficient a = 0.75). The mean across all
subjects was 15.05 (SD = 4.58). The Altruism score is the sum of the 20
responses to the Altruism scale (a= 0.79, M = -3.84, SD = 14.36). The
Self-Worth score is the sum of responses to the 16 Self-worth items (a=
0.75, M = 44.85, SD = 7.54).
Self-presentation was more positive in the face conditions than in the
text condition on Social Desirability and Altruism, the two scales known
to be more sensitive to social context (see Figure 7). No difference across
conditions on the Self-worth scale is consistent with findings that selfworth is more stable across situations. Subjects in the face conditions
reported themselves to behave in more socially desirable ways, Jf2, 119)=
2.20, p < 0.1, than did subjects interacting with the text interface. Subjects
in the face conditions also reported themselves to be significantly more
altruistic, 8 2 , 119) = 3.35, p < .01. Stronger results were obtained for the

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

115

Social Desirability and Altruism scales in ANOVAs with Self-worth as the
covariate (see Figure 7).
Subjects in the face conditions wrote less in the counselor interaction
than did subjects in the text condition, q 2 , 109) = 2.88, p < .05. Note that
there was no difference in the number of interaction turns across conditions; subjects in the face conditions were asked just as many questions by
the counselor as were subjects in the text condition. They simply wrote
less in reply to each question. In planned contrasts, there were no differences in self-presentation behaviors between the two different faces. Taken
together, the pattern of results in which subjects in the face conditions
presented themselves more positively in the self-presentation task and
wrote less in the interaction task supports Hypotheses 3a and 3b.

5.5. Differences Between Men and Women Across
Conditions
Figure 8 presents data on men and women separately. Men and women
did not differ in their perception of the question asker across conditions.
They did not differ in arousal or attention to the experiment (attitude
items, missing answers, or how long it took to answer self-presentation
scale questions).
Women reported significantly higher self-worth than did men, t(124) =
-2.04, jJ < .04, consistent with previous reports in the literature (Helmreich
& Stapp, 1974). There were no significant differences between men and
women on altruism or social desirability. Our interest was not in general
differences between men and women but in whether they would react
differently to the talking faces. In statistical terms, we were interested in
the interaction of gender with display condition. We predicted the face
display would evoke differences in the responses of men and women but
the text display would not. There were significant differences across
conditions in the patterns of how men and women presented themselves
but the text and face displays often evoked differences in opposite directions (see Figure 8). Both men and women presented themselves more
altruistically to the talking faces than to the text display, but only in the
pleasant-face condition was the difference between men and women large,
interaction F(2, 116) = 4.24, jJ < .01. Women wrote more in interaction
with the counselor in the text condition than in the face conditions,
whereas men wrote more in the face conditions, interaction q 2 , 123) =
5.04, p < .01. Our hypothesis, derived from the gender literature, was that
men and women would differ more in their response to a face display than
in their response to a text display. Our results, however, showed that men
and women differed in both text- and face-display conditions, but their
responses diverged according to the nature of the display. In general, men
responded more positively to the face displays whereas women responded
more positively to the text display.

116 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS

Response

Pleasant
Face

Text

Stern
Face

Interaction F
(2,106to 2,124)

Self-Presentation
Altruism
Women
Men
Social Desirability
Women
Men
Self-worth
Women
Men

4.24'
-8.0
-8.8

3.2
-7.3

-3.0
.16

15.0
13.2

15.8
13.6

16.1
16.3

46.2
43.6

44.5
42.8

45.5
44.4

8.0
11.0

7.4
10.7

0.93

0.72

Interaction
Minutes to complete counselor interaction
13.7
Women
8.7
Men
Number of words to counselor
Women
227
Men
140

4.92"

5.04..
123
167

107
160

Attitudes Toward Experience
3.58'
Liked participating?
8.2
7.8
7.7
Women
7.1
8.4
8.9
Men
-- - -- No&. In the text condition there were 19 men and 24 women; pleasant-face condition, 20 men
and 24 women; stem-face condition, 19 men and 24 women.
*p < .05. **p< .01.
--

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

There were no significant Gender x Condition differences in the three
attitude factors. However, an internal item analysis revealed that men
significantly liked interacting with the face more than with text, whereas
women preferred interacting with text, interaction fl2, 123)= 3.58, p < .05.

6. DISCUSSION
This study presents evidence that people respond to a talking-face
display differently than to a text display. They attribute some personality
attributes to the faces differently than to a text display. They report
themselves to be more aroused (less relaxed, less confident). They present
themselves in a more positive light to the taking-face displays. Men and
women both presented themselves more positively to the taking faces
than to the faceless interface. But men apparently enjoyed the experience

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

117

more than women did. They interacted more with the face-based counselors than with the text-based ones. They enjoyed the entire experience
more in the face conditions than text, unlike women.
Although the two expressions used in this study were perceived differently in a static discrimination study, generally subjects did not respond
differently to them in the interaction context. An expressive face display,
whether the expression was perceived positively or negatively, generally
elicited the same kinds of behavior from subjects in comparison with a text
display. Although surely it would be possible to create faces so grotesque
or charming that they would elicit different behaviors, in this study perceptible differences in expression did not systematically affect behavior.
We did not undertake to investigate the underlying reasons why people
might have responded to a synthetic talking face as though it were human
(relative to their response to a text display). One possibility is that some
subjects thought there was a real person behind the screen; another is that
the face interface might have caused subjects to think a real person would
be reading and evaluating their answers. If the talking-face display reminded subjects of a real human being, that thought (rather than the face
display itself) could have elicited social behavior. Throughout the instructions and experiment, we tried to ensure that subjects knew that the face
was simulated and that no real human being would see their responses.
Subjects' behavior during the experiment and their remarks during the
debriefing suggested that we were successful. So why would people respond to a talking-face display as they might to a person? Nass and his
colleagues have demonstrated that social cues (e.g., a taped human voice
emanating from a computer) can lead people to respond to a computer as
though it had some human attributes. For example, their experiments have
shown that people act as though computers were motivated by self-interest
(Nass, Steuer, Henriksen, & Dryer, 1994) and were sensitive to criticism
(Nass, Steuer, & Tauber, 1994). Field research has described how people
imbue computers with personality (Sproull, Kiesler, & Zubrow, 1984;
Turkle, 1984).For the purposes of this research, it does not matter if people
think the computer is actually human, is like a human, or has human-like
qualities. We were interested in demonstrating that people change their
own behavior in the presence of human-like attributes in the interface.
Future research should explore how different components of a talking-face
display contribute to people's social responses and how this might be so.
(For instance, in our study the voice, rather than the face, might have
caused subjects to behave socially. Or, certain "abnormal" features of the
face, such as the regularity of the eye blinks or the lack of inflection in the
voice, might have caused subjects to think that the "question asker* was
uncomfortable.)
On average subjects in all conditions said they liked the experience of
interacting with a computer-based career counselor (M= 8.0 on a 10-point
scale ranging from 1 [not at allj to 10 [very much]). There were no differences

118 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KfESLER, WALKER, WATERS
across conditions, although men liked the faces more than they liked the
text. This generally positive response may have been caused by novelty,
by demand characteristics (wanting to please the experimenter), or possibly even by a genuinely good technology application. The first and second
explanations should be further investigated by designing studies that incorporate talking-face displays into more ongoing work tasks and by
collecting longitudinal data. We note, however, that even though subjects
shared a general positive attitude, their behavior differed significantly
between text display and face display, as we had predicted.
The gender differences we found merit further investigation along at
least two different lines. One is related to the gender of the faces. It is
possible that male and female subjects' behaviors and attitudes would have
reversed themselves if the talking face had been male rather than female.
We selected a female face for this study based on the survey methodology
literature that shows that both men and women respond more and more
positively to a female interviewer than to a male interviewer (Ba~kstrom&
Hursh-Cesar, 1981; Luptow, Moser, & Pendleton, 1990). But we simply
may have encountered a cross-sex interaction preference in this study.
Although such preferences are common and expected in studies of interpersonal attraction, they are not commonly reported in the literature on
counselor-client interactions (Snell, Belk, Flower, & Warren, 1988; Snell,
Miller, & Belk, 1989).
Women might have responded negatively to the talking-face display
because it was a computer face. Women might be more sensitive to the
"unnaturalness" of a computer face than men are. Men might like a
talking-face display because it is a newer, more complex form of technology than a text display is. There is some evidence that men like new
computing technology more than women do (Chen, 1985). Furthermore,
in one recent study women thought it was less appropriate than men did
for computers to take on roles entailing personal interaction, such as boss
or psychiatrist (Nass, Lombard, Henriksen, & Steuer, in press). Although
this study did not investigate why men and women responded differently,
future work should pursue this topic. It takes on practical relevance, as
well as theoretical import, since today it is disproportionately men who
make decisions about how, whether, and when to incorporate synthetic
faces into interface products.
Part of the allure of computers is that they are malleable, in principle.
In practice, interfaces have been fairly clunky for a long time, but that state
is beginning to change. Designers can aspire to create ever more responsive interfaces. The technology used in this research was extremely primitive in comparison with what will be feasible in the future. Yet people did
change their personas-and liked it or not-in response to talking faces. The
prospect of people putting their best foot forward for their computer is an
odd one indeed. Some will immediately embrace the idea. Will reservations or sales clerks work harder with a face on the screen? Will children

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

119

learn more from educational software if it is accompanied by a school
teacher's face? Many people want computers to b e responsive to people.
But d o we also want people to be responsive to computers?

NOTES
Acknowledgments. We gratefully acknowledge assistance from Tom Levergood,
Andy Payne, Dave Wecker, and Ted Wojcik (Digital Equipment Corporation,
Cambridge Research Laboratory) and Sebastian Sas andJoshua Bernstein (Boston
University).
Support. Financial support was provided by a grant to Lee Sproull from Digital
Equipment Corporation and to Janet H. Walker from National Institute of Mental
Health Scientist Development Award MN 00533.
Authors' Present Addresses. Lee Sproull, School of Management, Boston University, 704 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215. E-mail:
lsproull@bu. edu; Mani Subramani, School of Management, Boston University, 704 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215. E-mail: rsm@bu.edu;
Sara Kiesler, Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. E-mail: Sara. kiesler@andrew cmu .edu; Janet H.
Walker, 103 Raymond Street, Cambridge, MA 02140. E-mail: jwalker@
world. s td .com; Keith Waters, Digital Equipment Corporation, Cambridge
Research Laboratory, One Kendall Square, Building 700, Cambridge, MA 02139.
E-mail: waters@crl .dec .corn.
HCI Editorid Record First manuscript received May 5, 1994. Revision receivedJanuary 24,1995. Accepted by Jonathan Grudin. Final manuscript received
July 5, 1995. - Editor

.

REFERENCES
Backstrom, C. H., & Hursh-Cesar, G. (1981). Survey research (2nd ed.). New York:
Wiley.
Bailey, L., Moore, T., & Bailar, B. (1987). An interviewer variance study for the
eight impact cities of the National Crime Survey.Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 73, 16-23.
Baker, M. J., & Churchill,J. (1977). The impact of physically attractive models on
advertising evaluations.J o u m l of Marketing Research, 14,538-555.
Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1974). Physical attractiveness. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in exfirimental socialpsychology (pp. 157-215). New York: Academic.
Binnick, Y. M., Westbury, C. F., & Servan-Schreiber, D. (1989). Case histories and
shorter communications. Behavioral Research Tlrcrapy, 27, 303-306.
Blascovich,J., & Tomaka, J. (1991). Measures of self-esteem. In J. P. Robinson, P.
R. Shaver, & L. W. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures ofpersowlity and socialpsyclrological attitudes (pp. 115-160). San Diego: Academic.
Bond, E. K. (1972). Perceptions of form by the human infant. Psychological Bulletin,
77,225-245.

120 SPROULL, SUBRAMWI, KIESLER, WALKER,WATERS
Bradburn, N. (1983). Response effects. In P. H. Rossi, D. Wri t, & A. B.
Anderson (Eds.), H p * k f ofsurvey n r e d (pp. 2*9-32d.~ew y o r e Academic.
Buss, A. H., & momin, R. (1984). %n@wammt:&arty Bslrskgiftg p r s m l i l y &a&.
Hillsdale, Nj: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Chen, M. (1985). Gender differences in adolescents' uses of and attitudes toward
computers. In M. McLaughlin (Ed.), Cmmunication yearbook (pp. 200-216).
Beverly Hilb, CA: Sage.
Collins, N. L., & Miller, L. C. (1994). Self-disclosure and liking: A meta-analytic
review. R y d r o w Bulb&, 176,457-475.
Deiner, E., Fraser, S. C., Beaman, A. L., & Kelem, R. T. (1976). Effects of
deindividusting variables on stealing by Halloween Mck-or-treaters.Journal of
PGrsomZily and SoGfal ~ d r o l o33,178-183.
~,
Duffy, S. A., & Pisoni, D. B. (1992). Comprehension of synthetic speech produced
by rule: A review and theoretical interpretation. Lmguagc and S'eech, 35,
351-389.
Eichenwald, K. (1986, November 2). Hi, voter. This is your president. New York
Times, p. 19.
Ekman, P. (Ed.). (8982). Emofion in the humanfoce (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Hall, . A. (1979). Gender, gender roles, and nonverbal communication skills. In
R. osenthal (Ed.), Skid in ~ n w r b acmmunicatidn
l
(pp. 32-67). Cambridge, MA:
Oelgeschlager, Gunn & Hain.
Helmreich, R., & Stapp, J. (1974). Short forms of the Texas Social Behavior
Inventory (TSBI),an objective measure of self-esteem. Bulletin of he Rydonmic
Society, 4,473-475.
Hilton, J. L., & Darley, J. M. (1991). Effects of interaction goals on person
perception. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advanus i~ expdmmkrl social psy&logy (pp.
235-267). San Diego: Academic.
Holroyd, K. A., Westbrook, T., Wolf, M., & Badhorn, E. (1978). Performance,
cognition, and physiological responding in test anxiety. Cognitive TlCrrapr and
Research, 3, 165-180.
Itou, K. S., Hayamizu, S., & Tanaka, H. (1992). Continuous speech recognition by
context-dependentphonetic HMM and an efficient algorithm for finding N-best
sentence hypotheses. Aoceedtirgs of ZCASSP '92, 121-124. San Francisco: IEEE
Press.
Kiesler, S., & Sproull, L. (1986). Response effects in the electronic survey. Arblic
Opinion Quarterly, 50,243-253.
Klatt, D. H., & Matt, L. C. (1990). Analysis, synthesis, and rception of voice
~mwticalSoci~ty
quality variations among f d e and mde talkers./ouml
ofAmerica, 87,820-856.
Laurel, B. (1990). Interface agents: Metaphors with character. In B. Laurel (Ed.),
Tlre art of hunran-cmngtter ifftcfotz design (pp. 355-365). New York: AddisonWesley.
Luptow, L. B., Moser, S. L., & Pendleton, B. F. (1990).Gender and response effects
in telephone interviews about gender characteristics. Sex Ruh, 22,29-42.
Maslach, C. (1979). Ne ative emotional biasing of unexplained arousal.Journal of
Ikmu61iiy aul ~ . r ( . 1!&d&gy,
33,953469.
Morton,J., &Johnson, M. H. (1991). CONSPEC and CONLERN: A two-process
theory of infant face recognition. Psyclwlogical Review, 98, 164-181.

d

ark

WHEN THE INTERFACE IS A FACE

121

Nass, C., Lombard, M., Henriksen, L., & Steuer, (in press). Anthropocentricism
and computers. Behuvior and Information Tcchnol! gy.
Nass, C., Steuer, J., Henriksen, L., & Dryer, D. C. (1994). Machines, social
attributions, and ethopeoia: Performance assessments of computers subsequent
to "self-" or "other-" evaluations. IntnrurtionalJournul of Human-Computm Studies,
40,543-559.
Nass, C., Steuer, J., & Tauber, E. R. (1994). Computers are social actors. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computer s),stMnr, 72-78. Boston:
ACM.
Oren, T., Salomon, G., & Kreitman, K. (1990). Guides: Characterizing the interface. In B. Laurel (Ed.), Tlu art of human-computcr interface d u e (pp. 367-381).
New York: Addison-Wesley.
O'Sullivan, M., Ekman, P., Friesen, W., & Scherer, K. R. (1985). What you say and
how you say it: The contribution of speech content and voice quality to judgments of others. Journal of Personality and Social Psyhlogy, 48,5442.
Ousterhout,J. K. (1994). Tcl and the Tk Toolkit. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Paulhus, D. L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. W. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures Ofpersonality and social
psyhological attitudes (pp. 17-60). San Diego: Academic.
Resnick, P. V., & Larnmers, H. B. (1985). The influence of self-esteem on cognitive
responses to machine-like versus human-like computer feedback. Journal of
Social Psychology, 725, 761-769.
Schuman, H., & Presser, S. (1981). Questions and answers in attitude surveys: ExpcrimGntJ in questionform, wording, and context. New York: Academic.
Shneiderman, B. (1987). Designing the user intefacc: Strategicsfor effective human-computcr interaction Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Snell, W. E., Jr., Belk, S. S., Flowers, A., & Warren,J. (1988). Women's and men's
willingness to self-disclose to therapists and friends: The moderating influence
of instrumental, expressive, masculine, and feminine topics. Sex Roks, 78,
769-776.
Snell, W. E., Jr., Miller, R. S., & Belk, S. S. (1989). Men's and women's emotional
disclosures: The impact of disclosure recipient, culture, and the masculine role.
Scx Rolcs, 27,467-486.
Snyder, M. (1984). When belief creates reality. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental socialpsychology (pp. 247-305). Orlando, FL: Academic.
Sproull, L., Kiesler, S., & Zubrow, I).(1984).Encountering an alien culture.J o u m l
of Social Issucs, 4q3), 31-48.
Takeuchi, A., & Nagao, K. (1993).Communicative facial displays as a new conversational modality. Proceedings of INTERCHI '93, 187- 193. Amsterdam: ACM.
Thorisson, K. R. (1993). Dialog control in social interface agents. Roccedings of
INTERCHI '93,139-140. Amsterdam: ACM.
Turkle, S. (1984). Tire second st& Computers and the human spirit. New York: Simon
& Schuster.
Walker,J., Sproull, L., & Subramani, R. (1994).Using a human face in an interface.
Roceedings of the ConfGrcnce on Human Factors in Computers '94, 85-91. Boston:
ACM.
Warner, R. M., & Sugarman, D. B. (1986). Attributions of personality based on
physical appearance, speech, and handwriting. J o u m l of Personulity and Social
Psychobg~,50,792-799.

122 SPROULL, SUBRAMANI, KIESLER, WALKER, WATERS
Waters, K. (1987). A muscle model for animating three-dimensional facial expressions. Computer Graphics, 21, 17-24.
Waters, K., & Levergood, T. M. (1994). An automatic li synchronization algorithm for synthetic faces. Roc6:edings of the M~~lthQaiia
8kmtG 31, 149-156.
San Francisco: ACM.
Waterton, J. J., & Duffy, J. C. (1984). A comparison of computer interviewing
techniques and traditional methods in the collection of self-report alcohol consumption data in a field study. Intewwtional Statistical &vim, 52, 173- 182.
Weizenbaum,J. (1976). ComputGrpower and human reason. San Francisco: Freeman.
Wrightsman, L. S. (1974). Assum tiotls about human mbure: A sociol-9~ydolagrcaL
analysis. Monterey, CA: Brooks Cole.
Zajonc, R. (1965). Social facilitation. Scicnte, 149,269-274.

?

APPENDIX
FfgnrsA-7. Wea wed to meuure r o d perception of computer dlrphyr
Scale and Items (Source)
Social Evaluation (Warner & Sugarman, 1986)
Unattractive-attractive
Depressed-cheerful
Unfriendly-friendly
Optimistic-pessimistic (reverse scored)
Cool-warm
Intellectual Evaluation (Warner & Sugannan, 1986)
Ignorant-knowledgeable
~ncompetent-competent
Irresponsible-responsible
Unintelligent-intelligent
Foolish-sensible
Potency (Warner & Sugarman, 1986)
Weak-strong
Frail-sturdy
Submissive-dominant
Sociability (Buss & Romin, 1984)
Likes to be with people (not at all to v n y much)
Refers working with others rather than alone
Finds people more stimulating than anything else
Is something of a loner (reverse scored)
Activity (Buss & Romin, 1984)
Life is fast paced (not at all to v n y much)
Usually seems to be in a hurry
Likes to keep busy all the time
Often feels as if is bursting with energy
Emotionality (Buss & Plomin, 1984)
Frequently gets distressed (not at all to v n y much)
Often feels frustrated
Everyday events make troubled and fretful
Gets emotionally upset easily
Is easily frightened
Often feels insecure
When gets scared, panics
Is known as hot-blooded and quick-tempered
Takes a lot to make mad (reverse scored)
There are many things that annoy
When displeased, lets people know it right away

B g ~ m A -r4h

betwesin r O d . E p s r c c l p C k n ~ IC~&S.j
Scale

Scale

1

2

3

4

5

6

1. Social Evaluation
2. Intellectual Evaluation
3. Potency
4. Sociability
5. Activity
6. Emotionality

-

.489
-

,098
,243

.559
.295
.I82
-

.433
.296
.I40

-.I84
-.I48
-.125
-.I67
.I92
-

-

,418

-

