Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

Creative Sense-Making: Quantifying Interaction
Dynamics in Co-Creation
Nicholas Davis, Chih-Pin Hsiao, Kunwar Yashraj Singh,
Brenda Lin, Brian Magerko
Georgia Institute of Technology
School of Interactive Computing
{ndavis35, chsiao9, kysingh, blin15, magerko}@gatech.edu
ABSTRACT

user. A cognitive theory describing collaborative creativity
would help design and evaluate co-creative systems. In
particular, measuring collaboration outcomes involves
being able to quantify interaction dynamics, e.g. the rhythm
of interaction, style of turn taking, and manner in which
participants are mutually making sense of a situation
through time [9]. However, there is a gap in the literature
about quantifying and evaluating open-ended creative
collaboration.

This paper describes a new technique for quantifying
interaction dynamics during open-ended co-creation, such
as collaborative drawing or playing pretend. We present a
cognitive framework called creative sense-making. This
framework synthesizes existing cognitive science theories
and empirical investigations into open-ended improvisation
to develop a method of quantifying cognitive states and
types of interactions through time. We apply this
framework to empirical studies of human collaboration (in
the domain of pretend play) and AI-based systems (in the
domain of collaborative drawing) to establish its validity
through cross-domain application and inter-rater reliability
within each domain. The creative sense-making framework
described includes a qualitative coding technique,
interaction coding software, and the cognitive theory behind
their application.

We have seen evidence of how collaboration leads to
dynamic and emergent meaning structures that inspire
novel ideas during empirical studies of pretend play [7] and
collaborative drawing [8]. We have also found how
collaborators often provide unexpected ideas and thus lead
to surprising results. The same dynamism and flexibility
that make creative collaboration so effective, also
unfortunately make it especially hard to quantify and
evaluate.

Author Keywords

Interaction;
Interaction
Dynamics;
Collaboration; Co-Creation; Sense-making

Creativity;

This paper applies the cognitive science theory of enaction
and its conceptual framework, participatory sense-making,
to the domain of open-ended creative collaboration and then
formalizes this theory as computational models of creative
collaboration. The described qualitative coding and analysis
technique, called the sense-making curve analysis, provides
a means to rapidly and reliably quantify interaction
dynamics continuously through time. This temporal data
can be mathematically analyzed using continuous functions
(e.g. moving averages, integrations) to formally classify
different sense-making strategies and trends in creative
collaboration.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous;
INTRODUCTION

Collaboration is a powerful way to inspire and support
creativity. During creative improvisational collaboration, a
new form of distributed creativity arises that can lead to
emergent, dynamic, and unexpected meaning to support
creativity in new ways [29]. Subsequently, the field of
computational creativity is beginning to explore how
intelligent agents might collaborate with humans during
their creative process in co-creative systems, i.e. systems
that contribute content to a shared creative product with the

The creative sense-making framework is applied to
empirical studies of human collaboration (in the domain of
pretend play) and technical systems (in the domain of
collaborative drawing) to establish its validity through
cross-domain application and inter-rater reliability within
each domain. With the creative sense-making framework,
we begin to offer a set of techniques and tools to begin
investigating the overarching research question: how do
humans collaborate in open-ended improvisational
creativity, and how can we design co-creative agents to
achieve similar benefits as human collaboration? The
contributions of this paper include introducing the creative

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
C&C '17, June 27-30, 2017, Singapore, Singapore
© 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4403-6/17/06…$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3059454.3059478

356

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

sense-making theoretical framework, coding technique, and
analysis approach.

and experimental apparatus recently introduced into the
cognitive science literature to quantify interaction patterns

RELATED WORK

Several metrics have been developed relating to creativity
and technology. The creativity support index (CSI) is a
psychometric survey instrument that measures the
effectiveness of a creativity support tool for assisting users
engaged in creative work [5]. Protocol analysis has been
used as a method for evaluating and comparing how
different user interfaces and input methodologies affect
creative cognition [24]. Some aspects of the user’s creative
process can be quantified by logging user data from
creativity support tools, such as measuring the emergence
of new ideas and ideation strategies [23], the novelty and
surprise of designs [27], the effectiveness of a creative
collaboration [8], and the relative entropy of ideas
generated throughout a design protocol [18]. Biometric
sensors, such as EEGs, have also been employed to
quantify in the moment creativity (ITMC) by classifying
periods of heightened creativity based on physiological
markers [4].

Figure 1. Perceptual crossing experimental set up (adapted
from [1]). Participants interact with the virtual environment
to discern static objects from other agents.

directly within an artificially constrained virtual
environment [1,10,11,17]. Researchers studying perceptual
crossing utilize a minimalist virtual environment in which
two agents (either both human, both artificial agents, or a
combination thereof) perform a spatial participatory sensemaking task whereby they try to differentiate the motion of
their partner from static objects using only tactile feedback.
Each player moves their avatar across their respective
screens using the mouse or arrow keys, and the participants
receive a vibration if the avatar has crossed paths with
something in the environment (whether it is a static object
or human). Participants have to interactively explore each
stimulus to determine whether it was caused by a static
object or another human in a process of participatory sensemaking. In this virtual environment, all actions are
restricted to constrained digital inputs and are thus easily
observable and quantifiable. This approach reveals some of
the underlying processes of participatory sense-making, but
it is not applicable for understanding sense-making in more
complex domains, such as open-ended and creative
interactions.

Due to the complexity and open-ended nature of creative
activities, researchers generally employ a mixed-method
approach of data triangulation that draws on multiple
sources of data to analyze and evaluate how a technological
intervention affects the creative process [4]. While these
creativity research methods provide insight into an
individual’s creative process and tools utilized during
creativity, evaluating creative collaboration presents unique
challenges around understanding how collaborators
coordinate in the moment to co-construct shared meaning
throughout a creative collaboration.
The enactivist paradigm in cognitive science has made
significant advancements in terms of understanding how
meaning emerges through interaction, both by an individual
agent and through social coordination [3,10]. These
researchers propose a novel theoretical framework focused
on the idea of sense-making, whereby an agent gradually
casts a web of significance and meaning onto the world
through interacting with the environment (and other agents
within it) to determine meaningful regularities [33–35]. The
theoretical framework of sense-making is conceptually
robust, replete with a vocabulary and paradigmatic
viewpoint for understanding cognition and interaction
through the lens of socially emergent and dynamic meaning
constructs [12,20,36]. However, there is a significant gap in
the field regarding quantifying the interaction dynamics of
sense-making during complex and open-ended activities,
such as improvisational creative collaboration. In the
enactivist literature, there are generally two approaches to
quantifying interaction dynamics and sense-making:
perceptual crossing and traditional qualitative analysis:

Traditional Qualitative Analysis

The second approach for understanding interaction
dynamics is traditional qualitative analysis, i.e. qualitatively
coding observational video data of complex social activities
to interpret the types of actions and strategies recruited
during participatory sense-making [22,31]. This approach is
widely used in dialog and conversation analysis [32] and
analyzing turn taking dynamics, such as leader/follower
strategies and topic shifts throughout the interaction [2].
These investigations typically yield descriptive statistics
about the types of events that occurred accompanied by a
thick cognitive ethnographic description of the factors that
influenced participatory sense-making, but these accounts
are often difficult to quantify.
Qualitative analyses employing event-based coding
practices are also common in analyzing and evaluating
open-ended creativity, such as artistic and design creativity.

Perceptual Crossing Methodology

Perceptual crossing is a type of participatory sense-making

357

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

For example, this approach has been utilized to evaluate:
collaboration practices of designers in a virtual environment
by segmenting data into discrete events based on behavioral
markers [26], as well as understanding open-ended artistic
creativity [38,27]. Interestingly, [38] included the
behavioral markers of pausing and body-repositioning (i.e.
stepping back from the artwork) as important events in the
coding scheme, which bears similarity to our proposed
approach. The methods described in this section all yield
powerful and informative descriptions about the number of
times events occurred and even the order in which these
events occur, but they are not specifically designed to
quantify the fine-grained temporal dynamics of interaction.

Free-energy principle: “The free-energy principle says
that any self-organizing system that is at equilibrium with
its environment must minimize its free energy.” [15].
Similar to sense-making, the free-energy principle claims
that humans interact with the environment, through both
active perception and action, to improve the accuracy of
their generative model of the environment, thereby reducing
free-energy [15,28]. When free energy is minimized,
actions are generated fluidly and with ease, allowing agents
to directly perceive affordances and meaning constructs in
the environment that increase the order and predictability of
interactions. When free energy increases, i.e. the cognitive
agent becomes surprised, perception and action are utilized
to help increase the accuracy, or recognition density, of the
generative model of the environment, i.e. making the
predictions of the generative model more closely match the
‘true’ conditions of the situation.

CREATIVE SENSE-MAKING

Creative sense-making (CSM) bridges the two general
methodological approaches described in the related work
(e.g. perceptual crossing and qualitative coding) by creating
a simplified qualitative coding scheme focused on sensemaking that lends itself to quantification and computational
analysis. The analysis demonstrates how different types of
collaboration strategies and styles can be quantitatively
classified through time. CSM was designed to support the
evaluation of continuous interactions in co-creation, such as
collaborative drawing and playing pretend. Using this
method provides insight about the interaction dynamics and
interaction trends in open-ended co-creation contexts.

Combining the free-energy principle with the conceptual
framework of sense-making enables a new method for
quantifying interaction dynamics based on the relative free
energy of a cognitive agent through time, as determined
through behavioral markers. In the proposed approach,
when agents do not have a robust generative model of the
environment, they have to engage in a process of sensemaking, which costs physical and mental energy. This type
of sense-making can be viewed as an investment of
physical and mental energy that has the potential to reduce
free energy, in the long run, i.e. improving the predictive
power of the cognitive agent’s generative mental model.
Thus, sense-making is formally defined here as the process
whereby a cognitive system gradually minimizes freeenergy by reflecting on and experimentally interacting with
the environment to build and refine a more optimal
generative mental model of that environment.

In the CSM approach, each participant's action is
categorized according to its functional role in sensemaking. We employ the free energy principle of the brain
[14–16] to develop a quantitative descriptor for these
different states. The free energy theory was selected as it
has neurobiological plausibility and it lends itself to
quantification and continuous analysis of agents through
time. The free-energy principle describes how biological
systems continually strive to reduce surprise, i.e. cognition
strives to create a dynamic and generative mental model
that makes the environment more predictable [15,28,30]. A
few critical definitions will help elucidate the theory of free
energy:

Within the context of this framework, we propose a
continuum of cognitive states corresponding to the
functional role of sense-making in the agent’s interaction
with the environment. Borrowing terminology from
Glenberg [19], we refer to the ends of this spectrum as
clamped and unclamped cognition. The concept of
clamping represents a cognitive mechanism that helps the
agent balance exploration versus exploitation to learn a
better, more accurate, generative model (i.e. make sense of
the environment).

Generative model: “or forward model is a probabilistic
mapping from causes to observed consequences (data). It is
usually specified in terms of the likelihood of getting some
data given their causes (parameters of a model) and priors
on the parameters” [14].
Surprise to agent: this occurs when a cognitive agent has
developed a generative model of interaction and anticipates
certain sequences of data using that model, but the data
from the environment violates the expectation of the agent.

Clamped Cognition: The process of maintaining or
slightly refining the selected generative model assuming
that it is the most accurate representation of the
environment. It generally occurs after making sense of a
task or activity. Behavioral markers include fluid
interactions with minimal hesitation (e.g. embodied play
actions, fluid drawing actions).

Free energy: “Free energy [is] an information theory
measure that bounds or limits (by being greater than) the
surprise on sampling some data, given a generative model”
[15].

358

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

Unclamped Cognition: The process of changing or
replacing the generative model by exploring and reflecting
on the environment from different perspectives. It generally
occurs during task onset and after surprises during the task.
Behavioral markers include hesitation (e.g. eyes closed,
confused look) and physically experimenting with the
environment and viewpoint of the environment (e.g.
futzing, inspecting).

unclamped. This type of clamping framework extends the
idea behind shared meaning established in the literature
about shared mental models [6,21] by taking into account
the dynamic and evolutionary nature of meaning
construction in open-ended creative interactions.
Within the unclamped category, there are two further
distinctions that can be made to increase the granularity and
explanatory power of our proposed coding technique.
Unclamped actions that are meant to reduce free energy
through sense-making can be either perceptually-based or
physical-based. Perceptual-based sense-making relates to
refining the brain's predictive model, which subsequently
changes how features in the environment are perceived and
interpreted. Since these processes are happening internally,
they cannot be directly observed, but individuals
experiencing this cognitive state display indirect behavioral
markers, such as pausing, hesitating, contemplating, and
looking confused, i.e. thinking. Physical sense-making, on
the other hand, changes the structure of the environment by
manipulating and modifying the environment, or by moving
the body and altering what information is available to the
senses, i.e. thinking by doing.

Figure 2. Visual representation showing the relationship
between free-energy and clamped/unclamped cognition.

We devised a set of behavioral markers to detect clamped
and unclamped cognition through a qualitative coding
procedure of video data. For example, in the context of
pretend play, a participant that is embodying a play
character and performing fluid play actions inside the
narrative world (i.e. diegetic actions) is considered
clamped. Conversely, if a player is hesitating, unsure,
pausing, or otherwise disengaged, this is a sign they may be
actively processing and working to make sense of the
situation to determine an effective strategy for moving
forward, which signifies an unclamped state. Pauses and
hesitations are also used in conversation analysis and
analyzing interaction dynamics [2]. When players
restructure or build additional meaning into the
environment explicitly (i.e. extra-diegetic actions), they are
actively making sense of the situation in an unclamped
manner.

These two different paths of reducing free energy represent
opposites that mirror the afferent and efferent flows of
sensory information in a cognitive system. Perceptual-based
sense-making processes change the afferent flow of
predictions being generated by the brain and projected to
the body (via the nervous system) by thinking and reevaluating the situation internally. Physical sense-making
processes change the efferent flow of incoming sensory
information available to the agent (to generate predictions
about) by taking actions that either change the environment
(through manipulation) or one's vantage point of it. Thus,
our proposed approach makes two chief categorical
distinctions: clamped and unclamped cognition, and within
the unclamped category, there is a further distinction
between perceptual sense-making and physical sensemaking.
Perceptual sense-making: the cognitive agent is working
to internally improve recognition density of its generative
mental model, i.e. thinking. Behavioral markers include:
hesitation, eyes closed, confusion, and task disengagement
in general.

In creative interaction, meaning is continually shifting and
evolving due to the participatory nature of improvisational
collaboration [29]. However, empirical evidence [3,7]
suggests that semi-stable (yet dynamic) meaning structures
emerge to produce a steady state whereby both participants
have a relatively robust predictive model that enables them
to interact fluidly in a situated manner, without much
explicit sense-making outside of fine-grained coordination.
In our work, these stable units of meaning are referred to as
nucleus activities that can grow through time as additional
layers of meaning are added [7]. These semi-stationary
states arise when both participants are clamped on a similar
meaning structure. Conversely, participants can be confused
or uncertain about what type of action to take or how to
interpret their collaborator’s actions due to a sparse
predictive model, which would be characterized as

Physical sense-making: the cognitive agent is exploring
the environment through interaction to decrease disorder in
the environment and increase the recognition density of its
generative mental model, i.e. thinking by doing. Behavioral
markers include: experimentally manipulating resources in
the environment and re-positioning the body to change
available sensory data.
Physical sense-making and perceptual sense-making each
have a continuum of cognitive states within them ranging
from clamped to unclamped cognition. While these two

359

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

spectra are interrelated, and may occur simultaneously (or
in very rapid succession), analysts approximate which state
is dominant through time by observing mutually exclusive
behavioral markers denoting what type of sense-making
activities are currently observable. For example, when
someone is pausing to reflect, they often briefly stop
performing functional actions while they are thinking (e.g.
looking away, closing eyes, etc.), which are strong
indicators the person is experiencing a perceptual unclamp.

attentively waiting for a partner to act. Conversely, in terms
of physical sense-making, searching for new resources to
introduce into the play session would be more unclamped
than slightly rearranging or restructuring elements already
in the play space.
When plotted along an x-axis representing time, these
numerical values create what we refer to as the sensemaking curve (as shown in Figure 3). This curve quantifies
what types of actions each individual participant was
engaged in throughout the course of the experiment. These
curves can be mathematically analyzed and combined to
quantify the interaction dynamics between the players.

The categorical distinction between these two types of
sense-making processes is reflected by assigning one type a
positive value and the other a negative value both using a
scale of 0 (fully clamped) to 1 (fully unclamped). The
reason this positive and negative convention was adopted is
because it enables quantifying interaction trends by looking
at the variance of the cumulative sum of these coded values
through time. From a theoretical standpoint, a value of 0
means free energy is minimized and cognition is clamped.
Any deviation from 0, in the positive or negative direction,
represents an unclamp event. The decision of which
category initially receives a positive vs. negative sign is
inconsequential if it remains consistent throughout the
analysis. The important delineation here is providing
granular temporal data about interaction styles and sensemaking strategies through time.

To summarize, we propose a new approach to formally
model the interaction dynamics of participatory sensemaking. We use the qualitative video coding conventions of
the sense-making curve to translate human interaction
dynamics and patterns of interaction into a machinereadable format. In the next sections, we describe the webbased tool that was developed to perform this coding
procedure and the analysis technique for combining sensemaking curves and classifying different types participatory
sense-making and styles of collaboration from sensemaking curves.
SENSE-MAKING CURVE TOOL

To quantify interaction dynamics, the qualitative coding
conventions described above can be applied to video
analysis. To accomplish this, an analyst reviews the video
and assigns a numerical value to each moment based on the
type of action the participant is currently engaged in. This
process is repeated for each participant in the experiment to
produce unique datasets characterizing each participant’s
actions through time. Clamped actions are assigned a value
of 0 to signify minimized free-energy, while unclamped
actions are assigned a value from -1 to 1 to signify
deviation from a free-energy equilibrium. The sign
(positive/negative) and value of the data point corresponds
to the category of unclamped action and the relative degree
of the unclamp, respectively.

The magnitude of the numerical value assigned to the
unclamped action is determined by assessing the degree of
unclamp based on behavioral markers. To help systematize
the coding process and increase inter-rater reliability, we
use discreet points on the cognitive spectrum to represent
magnitude (.5 or 1 in both categories). For example, agents
can pause their actions to wait for their partner to take their
turn (partial perceptual unclamp), or they can be completely
confused and disengaged from the play session (full
perceptual
unclamp).
Complete
confusion
and
disengagement should be considered more unclamped than

The prototype sense-making curve tool (shown in Figure 4)
is a web-based qualitative video coding environment. To
apply the qualitative codes to the video, the researcher uses
the up and down arrow keys to increase or decrease the
current coding value, which is visualized by a code selector
slider on the right side of the screen. The system samples
the value of the slider every 250ms and records that data
point in an array list. Therefore, the value the code selector
is currently resting at is the value that will be assigned to
the time that is currently being viewed in the embedded
video window.
Figure 3. An example of clamped and unclamped states
plotted on an axis showing how each state is coded during
analysis.

360

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

curve they are currently seeing visualized in the tool is not
necessarily the final form of the curve used in the analysis
(after the value transductions). It remains to be seen
whether the tool is most reliable when used with the 1 to -1
scale or a 0 - 4 scale in the interface.
The data analyst's role in this context is to decide which of
the five states participants are in based on behavioral
markers. The design of the behavioral markers is
determined by understanding what types of actions in a
domain should be classified as clamped/unclamped and the
degree of this association.

Figure 4. Prototype Sense-Making Curve Analysis Tool.

The most recent values from the array list (relative to the
current point in the video that is being played) are
visualized in the recent data display to the right of the
embedded video. When the user scrubs the video to
different time points, the data display and coding value also
move to that point in the array, allowing researchers to
revisit different parts of the video to re-apply codes.

USING SENSE-MAKING CURVE TOOL

The coding tool and technique were used on both the
pretend play dataset and the Drawing Apprentice user study
data. To collect the pretend play dataset, we conduct an
observational study involving 32 pairs of adult players who
were asked to perform two pretend play sessions for each
pair of the participants on a large play-mat with toys and
stuffed animals (c.f. [7] for a full description of the study).
The pretend play experimental sessions began by providing
participants with a narrative prompt (e.g. monsters attack,
drag racing, etc.). They were given 5 minutes for both setup
and play based on their interpretation of the narrative

The user can slow down and speed up the video playback
speed. Researchers using this tool typically slow the videos
down to half speed and code one participant at a time. The
analyst re-watches the video to code each participant. Once
an analyst was oriented to this approach, the overall code
application time per video (including both participants) was
approximately 4 to 1, meaning it took about 4 minutes to
code every 1 minute of video data. A 4 to 1 time-efficiency
ratio for qualitative video coding, and a 2 to 1 ratio for
coding individual participants within an interaction, is more
efficient when compared to other event-based coding
methods that may take up to 30 minutes (or more) to code
an individual minute of data (i.e. a 30 to 1 time-efficiency
ratio).
It is important to point out that while the sense-making
curve might facilitate rapid and reliable qualitative coding,
the granularity of analysis between the sense-making curve
and typical event-based coding techniques is much
different. The sense-making curve provides continuous and
targeted data about interaction dynamics, but it does not
identify individual actions, i.e. the content of the actions. In
future versions of this tool, we plan to allow tagging the
curve with different events to combine the power of eventbased coding with our proposed continuous coding
technique.
The numbers representing each code on the 1 to -1 scale
(according to the clamped/ unclamped convention) were
each mapped to 0-4 values at the request of coders (to
reduce time switching between common states in a given
domain). As long as each state is consistently coded
through time and the mappings to their placement on the 1
to -1 scale are stored, the numbers used in the user interface
of the tool can change. This change in scale creates an
interesting level of obfuscation between the analyst and the
predictions of the theory and cognitive framework since the

Clamp
Value

Classifications and Behavioral Markers

1

Physical Unclamp
Play: searching toy box, change locations
Drawing: moving device, explicit feedback,
verbalizations

.5

Partial Physical Unclamp
Play: place items, arrange items, build new
structures, extra-diegetic communication
Drawing: aesthetic UI interactions, simulated
drawing strokes

0

Clamped Actions
Play: fluid and embodied play actions
Drawing: fluid drawing actions

-.5

Partial Perceptual Unclamp
Play: hesitation, holding character waiting
Drawing: pen in hand waiting

-1

Perceptual Unclamp
Play: disengaged, distracted, hands by side
Drawing: leaning back from display, lowered
pen, looking away

Table 1. Summarized coding scheme for the pretend play
and Drawing Apprentice sense-making curve analysis.

361

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

Data Set

Pretend Play

Collab Drawing

Analysts

3

2

Codes
Compared

19,900

362,560

Technique

Fleiss’ Kappa

Kripendorff’s
Alpha

IRR Score

.71

.76

Interpretation

Substantial
Agreement

Substantial
Agreement

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

Table 2. Inter-rater reliability results from using creative
sense-making technique to analyze pretend play and Drawing
Apprentice data.

prompt. Three coders then analyzed a subset of the 64
recorded videos, resulting in a total of 128 sense-making
curves produced. These three coders were able to achieve
an inter-rater reliability (IRR) score of 0.71 (substantial
agreement according to [13]) using Fleiss' Kappa (shown in
Table 1). To calculate this score, all the coders analyzed an
individual play session and the Fleiss' Kappa for the coded
values of the left and right players in the session was
averaged. This Fleiss' Kappa value compared the reliability
of 19,990 total code applications between the analysts on
the pretend play dataset.

sample videos from each domain, tested their reliability,
and looked for points where their coding diverged. To help
visualize and quantify discrepancies between their code
applications, a 2D convolution was performed between the
analysts’ sense-making curve data in a pairwise manner for
each participant in the sampled dataset. Then, they
discussed possible reasons for the divergence and added
more detailed behavioral markers to the coding scheme to
help ensure future reliability. After several rounds of
refining the behavioral markers of the coding scheme,
analysts achieved substantial agreement over thousands of
code applications. In most instances in the literature, these
inter-rater reliability measures are not being used on data
sets with sizes this large, or with continuous temporal data.
For that reason, it may be beneficial to explore additional
inter-rater reliability measures to pair with the Kripendorff's
alpha and Fleiss' Kappa to help evaluate inter-rater
agreement through time with increased precision (such as
2D convolution and cross-correlation).
Performing the numerical transduction on the data (from the
0-4 scale to 1 to -1 scale shown in Table 1) before
performing these reliability measures may also yield
insights into the productivity of this method. For example,
once the data is represented in the 1 to -1 convention, it can
be bucketed into three categories of positive, neutral, or
negative. While this reduces the overall granularity with
which the data is being compared, it provides a better
indicator as to whether two coders were merely off in
measuring the magnitude of the unclamp versus a
completely different direction.

For the Drawing Apprentice user study, six participants
were asked to draw with both a human and AI drawing
agent during two 12 minute drawing sessions using our
prototype described in [8]. Two coders analyzed the 12 user
study videos resulting in 48 total sense-making curves
between the two coders with an overall inter-rater reliability
of 0.76 (substantial agreement according to [13]) using
Kripendorff's alpha (for two coders). For this dataset, the
IRR value for coding the participant (0.64) and co-creative
agent (0.86) were averaged to yield the 0.76 value for
Kripendorff's alpha over the entire dataset, which consisted
of 362,560 code applications (shown in Table 2). The IRR
calculation for Drawing Apprentice uses more codes in its
comparison because both analysts were asked to code the
entire dataset since it was feasible given its size (compared
to the much larger dataset for pretend play that had to be
divided among the analysts).

EXEMPLAR DATASET AND ANALYSIS

This section shows the application of the sense-making
curve analysis technique on a real data point from the
pretend play session with 32 adult dyads. This data
represents the sense-making curves coded for each of the
individuals in the play session. The sense-making curves
shown in Figure 5 present the qualitative coding
classification of two participants during a 5-minute play
session. Here, we can see both players greatly fluctuating
above and below the axis (i.e. building meaning/restructure
environment and waiting/disengaged, respectively) during
the first third of the play session. These fluctuations may
correlate to the setup period during which participants are
figuring out what kind of activities to engage in during the
play session by exploring the play mat, toys, and resources
at their disposal. This early period represents more active
sense-making where the participants are actively
experimenting with the environment and directly
communicating about what to do (i.e. extradiagetic
communication).

To achieve these reliability measures, we employed the
Delphi method, an iterative coding scheme refinement
technique [25]. Two different teams of analysts coded the

362

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

Figure 5. Sense-making curve examples from two
participants during one session of the pretend play study.

After about 90 seconds (about a third of the way through
the x-axis), both participants begin to engage in play
activities and their curves fluctuate more closely around the
0 axis (i.e. clamped cognition), cycling between 0 (engaged
in fluid play activity) and -.5 (attentively waiting). This
trend indicates some degree of turn-taking is beginning to
emerge at this point. It is important to note that the left
player continues to deviate greatly from the 0-axis at
distinct points in both the positive and negative directions,
suggesting that this player was more actively involved in
adding new elements into the play session as well as
disengaging more often, especially in the last third of the
play session.

Figure 6. Running cumulative sum (integral approximation) of
the right and left players’ sense-making curves

trajectory because it can be used to help identify interaction
trends and patterns in the overall creative flow, or
trajectory, of the play session. For this exemplar
demonstration, these trends are visually identified and
depicted on the graph. Each of these trends theoretically
corresponds to different ways of collaborating as well as
helping to identify when coupled play began to arise
between the players (the orange arrows in the graph). In the
actual analysis, more precise computational modeling
techniques are used, similar to the conventions used in
stock market analysis to identify buy, sell, and hold signals
from continuous stock data. The trends visualized on this
graph can be summarized as follows:

Calculating the cumulative integral of each of these sensemaking curves provides a more global picture of the
participants' activities through time. For this exemplar
demonstration, the MATLAB cumsum function was
utilized to approximate the integral. In a more precise
analysis, the MATLAB function cumtrapz was used to
increase the accuracy of the integral approximation.

Blue Line: Both players are hesitating or waiting. This
classification will be most distinct when both players are
completely disengaged for prolonged periods of time as
they will both have values of -1 during those times. When
both players are coded as -1, the cumulative integral is
reduced sharply, as indicated by the large negative slope in
the first three blue arrows. However, the value of the
cumulative integral can also fall when both players are
either attentively waiting (coded as -.5), or one is
attentively waiting while the other plays (coded as 0). In

The cumulative integral approximations shown in Figure 6
provide an easier way to visualize how each participant was
contributing to the overall flow of the play session
activities. From this representation, it becomes clear that
both players experienced a relatively dramatic initial
hesitation and waiting period followed by a period of
building meaning in the environment. However, after this
initial phase, their actions seem to diverge as the right
player spends more time watching or hesitating, while their
partner, the left player, continues to build new meaning and
engage in play (as represented by periods of rising during
the cumulative integral and holding steady, respectively).
Combining these two cumulative integrals together
provides information about how both participants’ actions
related to each other through time. To accomplish this
operation, two one-dimensional arrays are added together.
This combined cumulative integral can be used to identify
interaction trends involving both players.
The graph in Figure 7 shows the combined cumulative
integral of the participants' sense-making curves, which
shows the overall activity through time with respect to both
players’ actions. We refer to this curve as the creative

Figure 7. Sum of both players running integrals creates a
creative trajectory depicting interaction trends between
players through time

363

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

this case, the slope of the creative trajectory will not fall as
fast, such as the last blue line on the right side of Figure 7.

dominant clamp (one person is adding new meaning and
directing the play), mutual clamp (both participant are
playing simultaneously), and rhythmic balanced
interchange (participants are taking turns).

Red Line: Both players are building meaning or gathering
resources. This classification corresponds to both players
actively engaging in a sense-making process (unclamped
cognition)
through
interactively
exploring
their
environment by building new structures in the play area or
looking for new resources to add to the play area. When the
slope of the creative trajectory is positive, both players are
most likely engaged in unclamped actions (rated as +.5 or
+1) to make the cumulative integral rise. A high positive
slope would indicate that both players are actively looking
for new resources (i.e. rummaging through the toy box) to
add to the play mat. A smaller positive slope may indicate
building or tweaking elements that are currently on the play
mat.

From this point in the analysis, it is also possible to count
how much time was spent in each type of interaction trend
and when each interaction trend tended to occur within the
overall timeline of each pretend play session. With this
data, it may be possible to identify successful collaboration
strategies by comparing these broad interaction trends.
APPROACH LIMITATIONS

Without full validation, the findings from the CSM curve
analysis are still in their preliminary phases. There are a
few concrete activities that will help validate this technique
that we are planning for future work. The primary concern
with evaluating the CSM methodology is determining
whether the classifications the technique generates (i.e.
clamped/unclamped, mutual clamp, dominant clamp, etc.)
correspond to those events in reality, i.e. does the theory
correspond to the ground truth. One method for establishing
ground truth would be to refer to the retrospective protocol
analysis conducted with the participants to determine
whether the remarks the participant made during a given
time correspond to the cognitive state predicted by the
theory. However, since the CSM analysis method was
developed after the Drawing Apprentice and pretend play
studies were designed and executed, the retrospective
protocols did not focus on soliciting information explicitly
related to the cognitive states later identified by the CSM
framework.

Orange Line: Clamped quasi-stationary play state. This
classification represents some type of coupled play
interaction between the participants. There are many
different types of coupling that can result in this type of
semi-stationary state where the slope of the creative
trajectory curve is near zero. To classify this state, the
derivative of the creative trajectory curve can be calculated
and those areas of the derivative curve that are near zero
within a threshold of standard. These couplings indicate
regions of interest upon which to perform further subclassification analyses.
Gray line: Non-classified states. This classification
represents those points of the play session that do not fall
under the three classifications made above. These
ambiguous states of play may fall into one of the above
categories when the tuning parameters for the classification
algorithms are changed. They do not have to be directly
considered in the analysis, but their presence can help
researchers understand the granularity of their classification
parameters.

There are also procedural limitations arising from the
process by which analysts apply codes in the CSM
approach. There is an inherent limitation in terms of the
delay between an action onset and when a coder determines
to move the coding slider to that corresponding value (since
this is based on the analyst's reaction time and subjective
judgment). Depending on each analysts’ style, this delay
may time-shift or change the granularity of certain events in
the data, while still registering the overall deviation that is
important later in the analysis. This limitation could
drastically reduce inter-rater reliability while having an
insignificant impact on the comparison of the actual sensemaking curves and creative trajectories.

The segments of time during which participants were
engaged in coupled play (orange classification line) are a
rich source of data. Those time segments can serve as a lens
to go back to the initial sense-making curves to analyze the
original sense-making curve values to see what types of
activities participants were engaged in during the coupled
interaction. For example, where both players
simultaneously clamped on play actions? If so, were they
mutually clamped on the same activity, such as attacking a
castle? Another explanation could be one person was
continuously adding meaning while the other person was
continuously in the attentive waiting stage, which would
result in the cumulative integral sum remaining largely the
same and yielding a quasi-stationary state in the creative
trajectory curve. The values from the original sense-making
curve will reveal these nuanced details, allowing further
sub-classification of the quasi-stationary play state into:

When users switch between codes using this tool, it is
possible (and likely) that the system will sample data points
during the process of moving from one code to another.
This results in the system recording values between the
current code and the target code. The number of values
recorded between code switches increases depending on
how far away the target code is from the current code since
the user employs the up/down arrow keys to move between
codes. This limitation of the tool creates some potential
noise in the data as values are being recorded that were not
intentionally coded by the analysts. However, this source of

364

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

CONCLUSIONS

noise does not appear to significantly affect the overall
reliability of the technique. One method to avoid this
limitation is to use the number keys to control mode
changes rather than the arrow keys.

This paper presented the technical need and theoretical
foundations for the proposed sense-making curve coding
and analysis technique. The creative sense-making
framework provides a new method to visualize and quantify
the interaction dynamics of creative collaboration, e.g. the
rhythm of interaction, style of turn taking, and manner in
which participants are mutually making sense of a situation.
The framework was applied to empirical studies of human
collaboration (in the domain of pretend play) and AI-based
systems (in the domain of collaborative drawing) to
establish its validity through cross-domain application and
inter-rater reliability within each domain. The theoretical
justifications for the choice of the conventions for
behavioral coding markers as well as graphical
representation were described. We showed how the
continuous nature of the sense-making curve data allows
continuous functions, such as integrations, to provide
quantitative information about how the collaboration is
unfolding through time. This technique was applied to an
exemplar data set to demonstrate the type of data that such
an analysis yields. This technique may be generalizable to
other fields studying and designing products for open-ended
creative collaboration and co-creation.

Sense-making curves provide continuous data about
interaction dynamics, but they do not contain contextual
information about the type of actions that participants are
engaging in through time or the conditions of their
environment. To account for this important contextual
information, the sense-making curve tool could allow users
to associate text input (e.g. labels, tags) to different time
segments of the sense-making curve. To reduce the amount
of time it takes to tag and label events, the system could
employ an autocomplete technique for typing tags as well
as present the user with frequently used tags when they
begin the event labeling task. This feature could combine
the power of event-based coding (e.g. contextual details)
with the continuous interaction analysis of the sensemaking curve. With this information, the system could
classify interaction dynamic trends as well as quantify the
number of events and their temporal relationship.
DISCUSSION & FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Each sense-making curve represents a rich source of data
that can be further analyzed using a variety of parameters
and metadata that describe the features of each curve. Some
initial metadata parameters to explore are the highest and
lowest points of the curve, the number of inflection points,
the magnitude of inflections, and the slope between
inflections. Once each of the curves has been described
using the metadata representation, the curves can be
transformed to a new mathematical space for clustering
analysis to reveal patterns and trends within and between
different curves.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks to the analysts that helped apply and refine the
creative sense-making approach: Margaret Hu, Yueting
Lee, Shan Li, Lily Lau, and Margeaux Comerford. This
work was supported by NSF Grant IIS-1320520.
REFERENCES

1.
2.

Graphically representing the creative trajectory curves and
analyzing their trends can serve as a powerful data
visualization and conceptual aid to reason about openended creative collaboration. The continuous nature of the
sense-making curve data also provides opportunities to
explore much more granular analysis and classification
techniques. Further classification using the computational
modeling convention mentioned in this paper (i.e. the stock
market analysis technique) enables the possibilities of
further quantification to facilitate comparisons throughout
the dataset.

3.
4.

5.

It might be possible to utilize machine learning algorithms
to automatically code video data based on training sets
comprised of human coded sense-making curve data paired
with its video counterpart. The machine learning algorithm
could attempt to code the video and inform the user about
the segments of the curve in which it has less confidence
about its coded value. The user could perform a targeted
coding session to modify and update the low-confidence
segments, thereby reducing the overall code application
time while maintaining accuracy.

6.
7.

365

Malika Auvray, Charles Lenay, and John Stewart.
2009. Perceptual interactions in a minimalist virtual
environment. New ideas in psychology 27, 1: 32–47.
Stefan Benus. 2009. Variability and stability in
collaborative dialogues: turn-taking and filled pauses.
In Tenth Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association.
Jerome Bourbousson and Marina Fortes-Bourbousson.
2016. How do Co-agents Actively Regulate their
Collective Behavior States? Frontiers in Psychology 7.
Erin A Carroll and Celine Latulipe. 2012.
Triangulating the personal creative experience: selfreport, external judgments, and physiology. In
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2012, 53–60.
Erin A Carroll, Celine Latulipe, Richard Fung, and
Michael Terry. 2009. Creativity factor evaluation:
towards a standardized survey metric for creativity
support. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM
conference on Creativity and cognition, 127–136.
Sharolyn Converse. 1993. Shared mental models in
expert team decision making. Individual and group
decision making: Current, 1993: 221.
Nicholas Davis, Margeaux Comerford, Mikhail Jacob,
Chih-Pin Hsiao, and Brian Magerko. 2015. An
Enactive Characterization of Pretend Play. In

Session: Sensing and Visualizing Experience

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

C&C 2017, June 27–30, 2017, Singapore

Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Creativity and Cognition, 275–284.
Nicholas Davis, Chih-Pin Hsiao, Kunwar Yashraj
Singh, Lisa Li, and Brian Magerko. 2016. Empirically
Studying Participatory Sense-Making in Abstract
Drawing with a Co-Creative Cognitive Agent. In
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces, 196–207.
Hanne De Jaegher and Ezequiel Di Paolo. 2007.
Participatory sense-making. Phenomenology and the
cognitive sciences 6, 4: 485–507.
Hanne De Jaegher, Ezequiel Di Paolo, and Shaun
Gallagher. 2010. Can social interaction constitute
social cognition? Trends in cognitive sciences 14, 10:
441–447.
Ezequiel A Di Paolo, Marieke Rohde, and Hiroyuki
Iizuka. 2008. Sensitivity to social contingency or
stability of interaction? Modelling the dynamics of
perceptual crossing. New ideas in psychology 26, 2:
278–294.
Valentina Fantasia, Hanne De Jaegher, and Alessandra
Fasulo. 2014. We can work it out: an enactive look at
cooperation. Frontiers in psychology 5.
Joseph L Fleiss. 1971. Measuring nominal scale
agreement among many raters. Psychological bulletin
76, 5: 378.
Karl Friston. 2009. The free-energy principle: a rough
guide to the brain? Trends in cognitive sciences 13, 7:
293–301.
Karl Friston. 2010. The free-energy principle: a unified
brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11, 2:
127–138.
Karl Friston, James Kilner, and Lee Harrison. 2006. A
free energy principle for the brain. Journal of
Physiology-Paris 100, 1: 70–87.
Tom Froese, Hiroyuki Iizuka, and Takashi Ikegami.
2014. Embodied social interaction constitutes social
cognition in pairs of humans: a minimalist virtual
reality experiment. Scientific reports 4.
John S Gero. 2011. Fixation and commitment while
designing and its measurement. The Journal of
Creative Behavior 45, 2: 108–115.
Arthur M Glenberg. 1997. What memory is for:
Creating meaning in the service of action. Behavioral
and brain sciences 20, 1: 41–50.
Nitesh Goyal, Gilly Leshed, Dan Cosley, and Susan R
Fussell. 2014. Effects of implicit sharing in
collaborative analysis. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
129–138.
Catholijn M Jonker, M Birna Van Riemsdijk, and Bas
Vermeulen. 2011. Shared mental models. In
Coordination, organizations, institutions, and norms in
agent systems vi. Springer, 132–151.

22. Brigitte Jordan and Austin Henderson. 1995.
Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. The
journal of the learning sciences 4, 1: 39–103.
23. Andruid Kerne, Steven M Smith, Eunyee Koh, Hyun
Choi, and Ross Graeber. 2008. An experimental
method for measuring the emergence of new ideas in
information discovery. Intl. Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction 24, 5: 460–477.
24. M Kim and Mary Lou Maher. 2005. Comparison of
designers using a tangible user interface & graphical
user interface and impact on spatial cognition. Proc.
Human Behaviour in Design 5.
25. Harold A Linstone, Murray Turoff, and others. 1975.
The Delphi method: Techniques and applications.
Addison-Wesley Reading, MA.
26. Mary Lou Maher, Zafer Bilda, and Leman Figen Gül.
2006. Impact of collaborative virtual environments on
design behaviour. In Design computing and
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

366

cognition'06. Springer, 305–321.
Mary Lou Maher and Douglas H Fisher. 2012. Using
AI to evaluate creative designs. In DS 73-1
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Design Creativity Volume 1.
Etienne B Roesch, Slawomir J Nasuto, and J Mark
Bishop. 2012. Emotion and anticipation in an enactive
framework for cognition (response to Andy Clark).
Frontiers in psychology 3.
R Keith Sawyer and Stacy DeZutter. 2009. Distributed
creativity: How collective creations emerge from
collaboration. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity,
and the Arts 3, 2: 81.
Philipp Schwartenbeck, Thomas FitzGerald, Ray
Dolan, and Karl Friston. 2013. Exploration, novelty,
surprise, and free energy minimization. Frontiers in
psychology 4: 710.
Sune Steffensen and Sarah Bro Pedersen. 2014.
Temporal dynamics in human interaction. Cybernetics
& Human Knowing 21, 1–2: 80–97.
Sune Vork Steffensen. 2012. Care and conversing in
dialogical systems. Language Sciences 34, 5: 513–531.
John Robert Stewart, Olivier Gapenne, and Ezequiel A
Di Paolo. 2010. Enaction: Toward a new paradigm for
cognitive science. MIT Press.
David Vernon. 2010. Enaction as a conceptual
framework for developmental cognitive robotics.
Paladyn, Journal of Behavioral Robotics 1, 2: 89–98.
David Vernon. 2014. Artificial cognitive systems: A
primer. MIT Press.
Pawel Wozniak, Nitesh Goyal, Przemyslaw Kucharski,
Lars Lischke, Sven Mayer, and Morten Fjeld. 2016.
RAMPARTS: Supporting Sensemaking with SpatiallyAware Mobile Interactions. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2447–2460.

