Fitter: A System for Easily Printing Objects that Fit Real
Objects
Yoh Akiyama
Meiji University
Nakano, Tokyo, Japan
akyoh9933@gmail.com

Homei Miyashita
Meiji University
Nakano, Tokyo, Japan
homei@homei.com

draw a curve stroke
using a touch pen

ABSTRACT

When printing both self-making and existing 3D models,
users often create models to fit to a real object within it. Fitting models to the size of a real object is a delicate problem.
To address it, we present a concept to capture the size of a
real object, create or modify a model that conforms to the
captured image, and print the model on the spot. We create a
3D printer to realize this concept by installing a touch panel
display in the build plate system. In this paper, we focus on
creating containers that fit accessories. We create containers
for a pair of scissors, a smart watch, a drone, a pair of glasses,
and a pen holder.

Capture

Model

Author Keywords

Print

Result

Fabrication; 3D Printer; Fused Deposition Modeling; What
You See Is What You Get; Fit Real Objects

Figure 1. Modeling process

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous

uses Teddy [2], and users can automatically create a container
of a 3D model by drawing. Our system employs a modified
fused deposition modeling 3D printer. A display for editing
the 3D models and capturing real objects is installed in the
build plate. A webcam is placed on top of the build plate
so that its capture range covers the entire build plate and the
captured image is displayed on the build plate display in full
size. Users create a 3D model and adjust it to fit to the real
object in the image. The system targets users that are not
familiar with 3D modeling.

INTRODUCTION

The ability to print both self-making and existing 3D models
is of little value if these models do not fit real objects after
printing. Eventually, users will expect to use 3D models with
real objects in mind. Assuming that printed objects are used
in real situations, users need to print them to match their applications. For instance, we cannot sit on a chair whose height
is 2 m. Printing a cap for a USB memory stick that cannot fit
it is meaningless. Solving this problem is a delicate task.

OUR SYSTEM

The build plate of our system is modified with a touch display
(build display). Hence, users can input touch operations on
the build plate to create, move, and scale a 3D model (Figure
2). Moreover, a webcam is placed on top of the 3D printer;
it can capture a real object on the build plate and display it in
full size. There are only three buttons on the build display:
the trace button captures an object with the webcam and prepares the work, the load button searches for the 3D model
data on the PC, and the print button begins printing an object. In addition, users need to set up the temperature of the
extruder and the serial port in advance.

We present a concept to address this problem that involves a
3D printing method and extends the idea of “What You See
Is What You Get.” This concept involves capturing the size
of real objects, creating or modifying a model that conforms
to the captured image, and printing the model on the spot.
We present a system that uses this process to print objects
(Figure 1). With our system, users can design 3D models,
which fit real objects, on a 2D surface. The modeling system

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985730

When a user prints an object that fits a real object using our
system, they place the real object on the build plate, press
the trace button, and capture it. They can then perform two
actions with our system: create a new 3D model or scale an
existing 3D model to fit to the captured image. Finally, users

129

EXAMPLE OUTPUT

We created and scaled 3D models that fit to real objects using
the prototype system (Figure 2(a-g)). We created containers
for a pair of scissors (f), a drone (b), a pair of glasses (c), and
a pen holder (a), which are all made of PLA. Because PLA is
hard to warp. Here, we describe the process of creating containers for the glasses and drone. First, we placed the glasses
on the build plate and pressed the trace button. Thus, a fullscale image of the glasses was displayed on the build display.
Next, we drew a U-shaped curve stroke using a touch pen to
cover half of the glasses. Finally, the object was printed by
pressing the print button. We used magnetic iron PLA as the
printing material. After printing, we verified that it could contain the glasses and attached it to the side of a table using a
magnet. In the case of the drone, we drew a loop in a shape
that covered the drone. We constructed the container such
that it would have adequate room to contain its propellers.

Webcam
d

Build display
a
e

b

g
c

f

In addition, we printed existing 3D models of accessories
such as rings (d), an iPhone case (g), and bracelets (e). Here,
we describe the process for creating a ring. First, we selected the ring that we wanted to create from Thingiverse2
and downloaded the STL file. Next, we placed our hand on
the build plate and pressed the trace button. We then pressed
the load button, and the system displayed the downloaded
ring. We moved and scaled it to fit to the middle finger in
the captured image and pressed the print button. Thus, the
ring was printed on the spot. We verified that it fits on the
real middle finger. We printed six rings that fit on the middle or third finger of four users using the same 3D model.
In addition, we created one ring in a size such that the ABS
did not warp. In the case of the bracelets, the system has
to capture an arm, which is not flat. Therefore, the arm in
the captured image was little larger than the real arm; thus, a
slightly larger bracelet was printed. The iPhone case was created for an iPhone 5; however, we were able to use the system
to modify it for an iPhone 6.

Figure 2. System appearance and examples (a-g)

press the print button, and our system prints the 3D model at
the display position of the build display.
Our system employs a modified Prn3D system1 and a RepRap
3D printer. The heated bed is removed and an acrylic board
processed by a laser cutter is added. A 7-inch LCD and
a resistive-film-type touch panel are stacked in an acrylic
frame. There is nothing on the touch screen, so the user prints
3D models on it directly. The temperature of the system extruder ranges from 190◦ C to 210◦ C for printing objects. Nevertheless, there is no effect on the touch screen. We speculate
that there will be no problem if there is no contact between
the extruder and the touch panel.
Creating a New 3D Model

In order to create a new 3D model, users draw the shape of the
model that they want to create using a touch pen on the build
display. The modeling system can create models of containers and users can design two types of containers by changing
the drawing style. If the start and end points of a user’s input stroke are far apart, the system creates a container with
an opening between these points. If these points are close
and the input stroke is likely to be a loop, the system creates
a container with an opening at the bottom. If a user inputs
a new stroke, the previous stroke is canceled and the system
creates a new 3D model.

RELATED WORKS

Igarashi et al. presented a design method for covers in which
users can create close-fitting customized covers [3]. AutoConnect is a system that notes the connectors attached to two
real objects and automatically creates connectors [5]. Chen
et al. presented a method in which 3D printed objects are attached to real objects [1]. MixFab is modeling environment
using gesture operation [7]. In interactive construction, users
utilize laser pointers that are allocated a function at a plate,
and a laser cutter traces the motion of the laser pointers and
cuts the plate [6]. In DrawForming, users can create 3D topographical models that fit to real objects by drawing contour
lines on a surface [9]. In MARCut, users can cut a plate
that fits to real objects using a laser cutter with a markerbased laser cutting method [4]. In interactive fabrication,
they presented a system, Shaper, that interactively outputs a
polyurethane foam using a three-axis CNC machine [8].

Scaling an Existing 3D Model

Our system can both create a new 3D model and scale an
existing 3D model. By pressing the load button on the build
display, a user can search for the latest 3D model file in a
particular folder specified in advance. The system loads the
searched 3D model data and displays its shape. Users can
move the model by grasping and dragging the inside of the
shape or scale it by grasping and dragging its frame.
1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by COI, JST.
2

http://www.micro-factory.net/

130

https://www.thingiverse.com/

Connectors. ACM Transactions on Graphics, Volume 34
Issue 6, Article No. 231, 2015.

REFERENCES

1. Chen, X. and Coros, S., Mankoff, J. et al. Encore: 3D
Printed Augmentation of Everyday Objects with
Printed-Over, Affixed and Interlocked Attachments. In
Proc. of UIST ’15, pp.73-82, 2015.
2. Igarashi, T., Matsuoka, S. and Tanaka, H. Teddy: A
Sketching Interface for 3D Freeform Design. In Proc. of
SIGGRAPH ’99, pp.409-416, 1999.
3. Igarashi, Y. and Suzuki, H. Cover Geometry Design
Using Multiple Convex Hulls. Computer-Aided Design,
Volume 43 Issue 9, pp.1154-1162, 2011.
4. Kikuchi, T., Hiroi, Y., Smith, R. T., et al. MARCut:
Marker-based Laser Cutting for Personal Fabrication on
Existing Objects. In Proc. of TEI ’16, pp.468-474, 2016.
5. Koyama, Y., Sueda, S., Steinhardt, E., et al.
AutoConnect: Computational Design of 3D-printable

6. Mueller, S., Lopes, P. and Baudisch, P. Interactive
Construction: Interactive Fabrication of Functional
Mechanical Devices. In Proc. of UIST ’12, pp.599-606,
2012.
7. Weichel, C., Lau, M., Kim, D., et al MixFab: A
Mixed-reality Environment for Personal Fabrication. In
Proc. of CHI ’14, pp.3855-3864, 2014.
8. Willis, K.D.D., Xu, C., Wu, K-J., et al. Interactive
Fabrication: New Interfaces for Digital Fabrication. In
Proc. of TEI ’11, pp.69-72, 2011.
9. Yamaoka, J. and Kakehi, Y. DrawForming: An
Interactive Fabrication Method for Vacuum Forming. In
Proc. of TEI ’16, pp.615-620, 2016.

131

