Interaction Technique Using Acoustic Sensing for Different
Squeak Sounds Caused by Number of Rubbing Fingers
Ryosuke Kawakatsu
Division of Frontier Informatics, Graduate
School of Kyoto Sangyo University
i1658038@cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp

Shigeyuki Hirai
Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering,
Kyoto Sangyo University
hirai@cse.kyoto-su.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

IDENTIFICATION PROCESS USING MODELS OF SQUEAK

We propose a novel interaction technique that utilizes squeak
sounds caused by rubbing fingers on a smooth wet surface.
The technique can be used for obtaining some inputs by the
number of rubbing fingers in wet environments. This paper
describes a method and its performance for identifying the
number of rubbing fingers from the squeak sounds by using
spectrum models such as the Gaussian mixture model. Furthermore, we describe some applications by using this interaction technique.

SOUNDS

We can hear and notice a pitch from a squeak caused by rubbing a smooth surface, implying that a squeak sound has a
fundamental frequency (F0) and a harmonic structure. Therefore, squeak sounds caused by rubbing with multiple fingers
have frequency components with multiple F0s and harmonic
structures corresponding to each finger. Figure 1 shows spectrograms of practical squeak sounds caused by rubbing of
one finger and multiple fingers. In this paper, we propose
a method for identifying the number of rubbing fingers. The
proposed method focuses on the feature of frequency components and utilizes the result as an interaction technique.

Author Keywords

Squeak Sound, Frequency Analysis, Harmonics, Gaussian
Mixture Model, Acoustic Sensing,
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous
INTRODUCTION

Various studies have been conducted for developing interaction techniques in a smart house. Some of our previous studies [1,2]focused on bathrooms and we converted an existing
normal bathtub system into a user interface by using embedded sensors. A system called Bathcratch [2] detects squeak
sounds by rubbing on a bathtub edge. To generate squeaks, it
requires some conditions to cause the Stick-slip phenomenon.
A bathtub has a smooth surface, and water can cause the phenomenon with human skins. Bathcratch uses it as an interaction technique to play DJ-scratching. Here, we extended
the interaction technique using squeaks to recognize rubbing
states, rubbing events including sequence, and the difference
between squeaks caused by the number of fingers. This can
be used in various wet environments including kitchen, washbowls in a restroom, swimming pool, and spa. This paper
describes the method and its performance for identifying the
number of rubbing fingers by using frequency analysis. In addition, we illustrate some smart home applications by using
the proposed technique.

Figure 1. Spectrograms of squeak sounds; Left: one-finger, Right: multifingers.

Modeling squeaks for the number of rubbing fingers

We adopted the Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to identify
the number of rubbing fingers. At present, the training data
of GMMs are generated through power spectrums normalized
by each area and F0s. To train their GMM parameters, we use
the expectation-maximization algorithm. Figure 2 illustrates
plots of GMMs with one, two, and three fingers.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan

Figure 2. Gaussian mixture models for each squeak caused by rubbing
fingers.

© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985740

151

Identification Process

A piezoelectric sensor is attached to an object with a smooth
surface to measure vibrations as acoustic signals. Further,
the input signal is processed sequentially for each analysis
frame with a frame period of 1.16 [ms] (512 [samples], SR:
44,100 [Hz]). First, a root-mean square (RMS) value of a
frame is calculated. If the RMS value exceeds the threshold,
the following identification method is performed.
1. Power spectrum: Calculate a power spectrum using the fast
Fourier transform process.
2. Normalization: Normalize a power spectrum by its area
and F0.
3. Product–Sum Operation: Perform a product–sum operation using a normalized power spectrum and each precalculated GMM.
4. Select a Model: Select a model with a maximum value of
calculated results of the product–sum operation.
5. Next frame: Get input signal of frame length.

Figure 4. Relationship between F-measure and Frequency Range for
Calculation.

The maximum accuracy obtained for identifying one finger
is more than 95%, and the accuracies for identifying two and
three fingers are more than 60%. However, if two and three
fingers are regarded as multifingers, the maximum accuracy
is more than 95%.

This process is repeated until the RMS value reduces more
than the threshold. An identification result is the most selected model in a sequence of processed frames.

EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS

In this section, we illustrate a few applications utilizing the
different squeak sounds caused by the number of rubbing fingers. Bathcratch+ is an advanced version of Bathcratch, an
entertainment system of DJ scratching that functions by rubbing on a bathtub edge. This advanced version can be played
by switching scratching sounds with a number of rubbing fingers. iRubBook is a book reader application that controls paging with different squeak sounds. This app can switch books
through squeak-sequence patterns. iRubRemote is a remote
controller for home appliances that are operated using IR remotes that utilize squeak sounds and their sequence patterns.

Figure 3. Block diagram for identification process.

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Figure 5. Example applications using squeaks by finger-rubbing.

This section describes the performance evaluation for the
aforementioned identification method with the top of a
smooth-surfaced bathtub edge. In addition, we confirmed
similar results using the tabletop of a kitchen counter. In this
study, we verified the performance due to the change in two
parameters: normalized frequency ranges for calculation and
GMM components. This paper describes the result of evaluation for normalized frequency ranges for calculation.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we proposed a novel interaction technique utilizing squeak sounds by rubbing a smooth wet surface. This
technique can identify the difference between a squeak made
by one-finger and by multifingers. In addition, we illustrated a few applications using this interaction technique. At
present, the identification method uses the GMM for modeling frequency components. Its identification performance is
more than 95%. In contrast to the accuracies of one finger and
multifingers, the accuracy of identifying two and three fingers
is not high. In the future, we plan to improve this accuracy
by using other signal-processing techniques such as machine
learning and frequency analysis. In addition, we plan to verify the usefulness of this interaction technique by using some
applications in specific situations.

Performance Evaluation of Calculation Frequency Range

The normalized frequency range for calculation affects the
identification of the number of fingers. A large frequency
component (e.g., F0) biases the result. Moreover, higher frequency components (e.g., over 10 kHz) do not affect the identification but affect the loads for calculations. Therefore, to
obtain better identification results, an appropriate frequency
range should be used. Figure 4 shows the verification results.

152

3. Chris Harrison, Scott E. Hudson. Scratch input: creating
large, inexpensive, unpowered and mobile finger input
surface, Proc. of UIST’08, pp205-208, 2008.

REFERENCES

1. Shigeyuki Hirai, Yoshinobu Sakakibara and Hironori
Hayashi. 2013. Enabling Interactive Bathroom
Entertainment Using Embedded Touch Sensors in the
Bathtub, In Proc. of ACE2013, 544-547.

4. Roderick Murray-Smith, John Williamson, Stephen
Hughes, Torben Quaade: Stane: Synthesized Surfaces
for Tactile Input, Proc. of CHI2008, pp.1299-1302 2008.

2. Shigeyuki Hirai, Yoshinobu Sakakibara and Seiho
Hayakawa. 2012. Bathcratch: Touch and Sound-Based
DJ Controller Implemented on a Bathtub, In Proc. of
ACE2012, 44-56.

153

