Developing fMRI-Compatible Interaction Systems through
Air Pressure
Handityo Aulia Putra
School of Information
Kochi University of
Technology, Japan
handityo.aulia@gmail.com

Xiangshi Ren
Center for Human-Engaged
Computing
Kochi University of
Technology, Japan
ren.xiangshi@kochi-tech.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

We leverage the use of air pressure to expand the interaction
space within fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging).
We present three example applications that are not previously
possible in conventional fMRI interaction devices: 1) pedal
interface that can record continuous pressure value pressed
by users, 2) wrist tactile interface that can provide various
tactile patterns or stimuli, 3) adjustable resistance joystick
that can provide feedback through different resistance levels.
Our work shows that the use of air pressure can enable new
research opportunities for fMRI researchers.
Author Keywords

fMRI; response device; air pressure; tactile feedback.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous
Figure 1: Air-based system components (a) and its three possible configurations: (b) analog pedal interface, (c) wrist tactile interface, (d) adjustable resistance joystick interface.

INTRODUCTION

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) [1] enables
medical doctors and researchers to study correlations between
brain activation and tasks performed by participants during
a brain scan. In a task that requires more input choices or
special stimulation rather than binary input or visual stimulation, additional equipment is required. For example, fMRI researchers may want to understand some driving behaviors and
record analog input using pressure sensitive pedal interaction,
and want to understand brain mappings of tactile sensations
by providing some tactile stimulation to the participants.

fMRI [4]. Although some fMRI-compatible air-based systems exist, they are limited to a single configuration to provide output only, such as robot interaction [3], skin stimulation [5], haptic interface [6].
This paper proposes an fMRI-compatible air-based system,
that can be configured to record analog input, provides tactile stimulation or both tasks (record input and provide tactile
stimulation) to users in the fMRI environment. We showcase
our air-based system in three configurations, i.e, pedal interface, wrist tactile interface, and adjustable resistance joystick,
as shown in Figure 1. We envision that in the future air-based
systems will allow fMRI researchers to expand their choice of
tools in experiments aimed at understanding human behavior
using fMRI scanners.

However, there is a limited choice of interaction systems that
allow recording analog value, providing tactile stimulation, or
both. Air pressure system and 3D printer technology can be
utilized to address this issue but has been under-explored for

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984764

FMRI-COMPATIBLE INTERACTION DEVICE

Figure 2 shows electronic and pneumatic configurations of
the air-based system. The main consideration for the system
is that all components which will be put inside fMRI need to
be non-ferromagnetic. The pneumatic-based systems that we

191

that can be inflated and deflated depending on its internal air
pressure. This can be used to simulate a vibration or squeezing sensation with many different patterns to the user’s wrist
by manipulating the internal air pressure level of the system.
This wearable wrist configuration can be leveraged to study
the effectiveness of HaptiColor [2] from a brain study perspective. The fMRI researchers can further investigate
whether there is an association between color and spatiotemporal tactile sensation.
Adjustable Resistance Joystick Interface

Figure 1d shows an adjustable resistance joystick interface
that can provide x-y coordinate input with simulated resistance. The strength of resistance can be controlled by manipulating internal air pressure for each air-pocket, i.e., resistance is higher with higher internal air pressure.
The joystick is 3D-printed and consisted of four pressure sensitive air-pockets. The adjustable resistance characteristic allows fMRI researchers to manipulate different resistance for
joystick interaction and study whether different resistances
have an impact on human motor skills.

Figure 2: (a) Electronic diagram of the air-based system, (b) pneumatic
configuration for analog input detection and tactile feedback generation.

FUTURE WORK

explore in this work rely on changes in air pressure to record
user response information and to generate tactile sensation to
users inside the fMRI scanner.

We are currently designing the configuration for fragrance delivery inside fMRI, where we will conduct an fMRI study regarding the effect of specific fragrance to the human brain.
We envision that fMRI researchers can do different tasks
(recording input, providing feedback, delivering fragrance)
by utilizing one system only (with multiple configurations).

APPLICATIONS

All configurations of the air-based system shown in Figure
1 have been evaluated for fMRI-compatibility on a 3.0 Tesla
scanner. We confirmed that the air-based system conforms the
requirements to be used inside the fMRI. We illustrate some
potential applications of fMRI-compatible air-based interaction system in the following subsections.

REFERENCES

1. Amaro, E., and Barker, G. J. Study design in fmri: basic
principles. Brain and cognition 60, 3 (2006), 220–232.
2. Carcedo, M. G., Chua, S. H., Perrault, S., Wozniak, P.,
Joshi, R., Obaid, M., Fjeld, M., and Zhao, S. Hapticolor:
Interpolating color information as haptic feedback to
assist the colorblind. In Proc. of CHI, ACM (2016),
3572–3583.

Pedal Interface

Figure 1b shows a pedal interface which has the ability to
measure variable pressure strength applied by the user for acceleration and brake, unlike conventional fiber-optic pedal interface which can only detect binary information (pressed or
not). Variable pressure strength recording can be used to investigate whether the users did a mid-way error correction.
For example, a driver pressed acceleration on a red light and
realized half-way that he/she should have pressed brake, then
the driver stopped pressing acceleration pedal and changed
to press the brake pedal. This error correction cannot be detected by an on-off only interface.

3. Gassert, R., Moser, R., Burdet, E., and Bleuler, H.
Mri/fmri-compatible robotic system with force feedback
for interaction with human motion. IEEE ASME Trans. on
Mechatronics 11, 2 (2006), 216.
4. Vázquez, M., Brockmeyer, E., Desai, R., Harrison, C.,
and Hudson, S. E. 3d printing pneumatic device controls
with variable activation force capabilities. In Proc. CHI
2015, ACM (2015), 1295–1304.

With the mid-way pressure information available, fMRI researchers can possibly study which part of the brain is responsible for decision making and decision correction. The pedal
configuration has been and currently utilized to study driving
behavior of different age group people by fMRI researchers
in our university. The study shows that the pedal can provide
analog pressure information without reducing the quality of
fMRI scanned images.

5. Wienbruch, C., Candia, V., Svensson, J., Kleiser, R., and
Kollias, S. S. A portable and low-cost fmri compatible
pneumatic system for the investigation of the
somatosensensory system in clinical and research
environments. Neuroscience letters 398, 3 (2006),
183–188.
6. Yu, N., Murr, W., Blickenstorfer, A., Kollias, S., and
Riener, R. An fmri compatible haptic interface with
pneumatic actuation. In IEEE ICORR. (2007), 714–720.

Wrist Tactile Interface

Figure 1c shows the air-based system in a wrist tactile configuration, which consists of multiple 3D printed flexible buttons

192

