OmniEyeball: Spherical Display Embedded With
Omnidirectional Camera Using Dynamic Spherical Mapping
Zhengqing Li, Shio Miyafuji, Toshiki Sato, Hideki Koike
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{li.z.ah, miyafuji.s.aa}@m.titech.ac.jp, {toshiki, koike}@cs.titech.ac.jp
ABSTRACT

Recently, 360-degree panorama and spherical displays have received more and more attention due to their unique panoramic
properties. Compared with existing works, we plan to utilize
omnidirectional cameras in our spherical display system to
enable omnidirectional panoramic image as input and output.
In our work, we present a novel movable spherical display
embedded with omnidirectional cameras. Our system can
use embedded cameras to shoot 360-degree panoramic video
and project the live stream from its cameras onto its spherical
display in real time.
In addition, we implemented an approach to achieve the dynamic spherical projection mapping in order to project to moving spherical devices. We have also been creating applications
utilizing system’s features by using 360-degree panoramic
image as input and output.
Author Keywords

Spherical display; omnidirectional camera; 360-degree
panorama; projection mapping
INTRODUCTION

The sphere, as a typical geometric object, is used in lots of designs. In recent years, researchers started proposing spherical
displays, such as Sphere [1] created by Benko et al., which is
a system using spherical image as the output.
However, the existing works haven’t tried to embed cameras
inside their spherical devices. Camera is an important way to
enable image input for interactive systems. Most of the current
smart devices contains at least one camera in their bodies to
create more features. For instance, Horita et al. [2] embedded
a camera into a ball which made their device be able to provide
point of view from the ball’s position.
In addition, a special type of cameras is becoming increasingly
popular. Within two years, more than ten kinds of omnidirectional cameras have been released, such as the Ricoh Theta
S. They have been attracting many users depending on the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984765

193

Figure 1. Live streaming video captured by the embedded SP360 4K
camera is projected on the spherical display.

amazing 360-degree panorama. Compared with original 2D
images, the omni-panorama can provide 360*360 degrees
graphic information in one picture.
Currently, there are many digital devices which are capable
of both image input and output. For instance, people love to
shoot and view pictures in their smartphone. However, there is
still no similar device for 360-degree panoramic image. Due
to the feature of spherical shape, spherical displays are the
perfect matches for 360-degree panoramic image. Therefore,
we decided to develop a new device which can both capture
360-degree panoramic image as well as display it.
In our work, we embedded panoramic cameras into the spherical display system. Our device can capture 360-degree
panoramic images and also display spherical image. It’s able to
do panoramic live stream through wireless connection and the
real-time panoramic image can be seen directly projected onto
the spherical display itself with dynamic spherical projection
mapping. We believe this new I/O device for omnidirectional
image will bring users more interactive ways in daily life.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW

Currently, our spherical device consists of one rubber ball
embedded with one PIXPRO SP360 4K digital camera on
the pole. The SP360 camera is equipped with a fisheye lens
which can cover 360-degree in horizontal direction has a 235
degrees field of view. Therefore, most of the surrounding
environment of the spherical device can be covered by this
SP360 camera with limited blind zone. Our proposed system
streams live video to the PC, then integrates our dynamic
spherical projection mapping technology and motion tracking

Figure 3. Remote Panoramic Video Chat.

Panoramic Selfie Camera

Users are allowed to take 360-degree panoramic selfies by
using the spherical device in this application. Users can use
the live streaming display to check what is captured.

Figure 2. Diagram of spherical projection mapping.

Remote Panoramic Video Chat

Figure 3 shows a practical application we are still working
on. This application allows users in different places to do
video chat with 360-degree panoramic image by arranging
two spherical devices in different places, such as conference
rooms. Each spherical device will use its embedded cameras
to capture surrounding environment, and the image data will
be projected onto the other spherical device by the system.

system to project the live stream image onto its spherical
display. Therefore, our device seems like a spherical mirror
as shown in Figure 1 . The live stream we can receive from
the SP360 4K camera has a 1280*720 resolution with 15fps
when connected to the PC by WiFi. The format of the image
is fisheye motionJPEG. In order to integrate the SP360 4K
camera’s live stream into our system, we transfer raw image
into equirectangular format by using a fragment shader in the
graphic system. This shader will do camera calibration to
convert fisheye image to square image with high quality and
low cost.

We believe that our proposed system can improve remote conference meetings due to its panoramic and movable features.
It will be efficient that people can just carry our spherical device to view every detail in the other place and simultaneously
show important information in their surrounding environment.

DYNAMIC SPHERICAL MAPPING

We proposed an approach to do 360-degree projection to moving balls in realtime. The positional relationship between the
ball and projectors can be calculated by transforming projector
positions in the real world to the camera coordinate system.
We build a motion tracking system consisting of 6 motion
tracking cameras to track the position of the moving ball. By
combining three-dimensional ball positions from the motion
tracking system, the system generates the projection images
corresponding to each projector’s position.
Figure 2 shows the diagram of spherical mapping. The different images in the virtual desktop are computed by the PC
based on the position of the ball and projectors from the motion tracking system. Then, these images are projected by
corresponding projectors from different directions to cover the
whole area of the ball according to the ball’s position and orientation. To put real-time projection into practice, this system
overlays images without optimizing the overlapping parts.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Until now, we have built a spherical system which provides
panoramic image as input and spherical display as output. We
also discovered how to do spherical mapping on a sphere more
accurately. Finally, several applications have been created to
embody the entertainment and practicality.
We are working on optimizing this system by embedding
two PIXPRO SP360 4K digital cameras on the poles. In this
case, the proposed system can capture the whole surrounding
environment with only a tiny blind zone.
Moreover, we plan to enable gesture recognition as another
input using image processing. We also consider to replace the
display technology from projection to OLED, or the position
of the spherical device might be tracked by sensors such as a
GPS sensor in the future. In this case, we can build a mobile
I/O device of 360-degree panorama in the future, just like the
camera feature of the smartphone.

EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS

We have been devoloping three applications utilizing the spherical and panoramic features of the system.
360-degree Panorama Viewer

In this application, we project the 360-degree panoramic image
or video onto the spherical display. Compared with dragging
the mouse to see the intended area, we believe that rotating a
ball-shaped device is more intuitive.

REFERENCES

1. Hrvoje Benko, Andrew D Wilson, and Ravin
Balakrishnan. 2008. Sphere: multi-touch interactions on a
spherical display. In Proceedings of the 21st annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 77–86.
2. Kodai Horita, Hideki Sasaki, Hideki Koike, and Kris M
Kitani. 2013. Experiencing the ball’s POV for ballistic
sports. In Proceedings of the 4th Augmented Human
International Conference. ACM, 128–133.

194

