Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

Visualizing Conversation
Judith Donath Karrie Karahalios Fernanda Viegas
MIT Media Lab
20 Ames Street
Cambridge, MA, 02138
{judith, kkarahal, fviegas}@media.mit.edu

Abstract
Although the archive of text generated by a persistent
conversation (i.e. newsgroup, mailing list, recorded chat,
etc.) is searchable, it is not very expressive of the underlying social patterns. In this paper we will discuss the design
of graphical interfaces that reveal the social structure of
the conversation by visualizing patterns such as bursts of
activity, the arrival of new members, or the evolution of
conversational topics. Our focus is on two projects: Chat
Circles, a graphical interface for synchronous conversation and Loom, a visualization of threaded discussion.
Through these examples we will explore key issues in the
generation, design and use of graphical interfaces for persistent conversations.

1. Introduction
Most on-line conversation is text. This is partly due to
the history of the technology: textual interfaces were the
norm when email, newsgroups and chat-rooms were
developed. As a medium for exchanging ideas, text has a
number of excellent qualities. It is highly adaptable –
given the basic alphanumeric keyboard, people can assemble discourses on any topic. With skill, it can be quite
expressive. Yet as a conversational medium, the austerity
of text can be detrimental. In particular, it is difficult to
convey many kinds of social information, such as conversational tone, patterns of activity – even the size of the
conversational group is opaque in most text-based foums.
One of the key features of on-line conversations is their
persistence. Asynchronous discussions such as newsgroups or mailing lists are inherently persistent, and
recorded logs bring persistence to the more ephemeral
synchronous chats. Yet the drawbacks of the text-only
interface are exacerbated when perusing the archives of a
discussion. The rhythms of the conversation’s exchanges
are obliterated and the reader is likely to approach the
mass of accumulated archival material by searching or

another non-linear approach, often losing in the process
much of the conversation’s context. To help the reader
apprehend the discussion’s structure and history and
become familiar with its community, new interfaces for
viewing, searching and annotating the amassed material
are needed.
Graphical interfaces can provide a way to see information that is hidden or unavailable in a textual representation. One can show the size of the audience in an on-line
chat or highlight key moments in the mass of an archive;
the graphics can be added ex post facto or they can be integrated into the design of the conversational interface.
Indeed, there are an infinite number of ways that a conversation can be visualized. The essential problem is to identify the salient data and to represent it accurately and
intuitively.
This paper is about designing graphical representations
for persistent conversations. In it, we present two very different projects – Chat Circles, a graphical interface for
synchronous conversation and Loom, a visualization of
threaded discussion – and use them as a springboard for
discussing a number of fundamental design issues.
Our focus is on creating representations that highlight
social information and help people make sense of the virtual social world. We call our approach social visualization, which we define as the visualization of social
information for social purposes. In some ways, social visualization is similar to data visualization; we are taking a
mass of information and finding ways to represent it visually so that salient information becomes apparent. Yet
there are key differences. As we shall see in the discussion
of Loom, social visualization often deals with very inexact
or subjective material. And, as will be discussed in the
context of Chat Circles, the visualizations must take into
account the fact that we are highly attuned to social cues; it
is easy to introduce spurious and misleading impressions
via poorly chosen graphical representations.

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

1

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

Fig. 1: Text-based chats display the participants’
comments in a linear stream.

2. Chat Circles
Chat systems have become a popular means of communication. These are synchronous on-line discussion, in
which a number of people can simultaneously communicate with each other by typing; the messages each person
types appear on the screen of all the participants. The first
multi-user chat system, Internet Relay Chat (IRC), was
developed in 1988; previously, synchronous on-line communication had been limited to two participants [13]. Since
then, chat systems have become the backbone of popular
services such as AOL and, most recently, are appearing as
featured attractions on web-sites [5].
Most chat systems are purely text-based: the participants type messages which are then displayed sequentially
on each person’s screen (Fig. 1). These messages convey
two types of information. One is the content of the message, the other is fact of the participant’s presence. In an
text-based chat, presence is manifest only when one is
actively messaging: silence is indistinguishable from
absence. This has a strong impact on the style of discourse,
for participants often feel compelled to constantly post
messages so that they will not be forgotten by the others.
Chat systems are often criticized for the inanity of the conversations, one cause of which is this need to maintain
presence by constant speech, even when one has nothing to
say.
In graphical chat systems the participants, each represented by a figure of some sort, are all displayed in a single
pictorial space (Fig. 2). These figures or avatars1 range
from simple smiley faces to elaborate (often Medieval or
sci-fi themed) animated drawings. Text is still used for conversation but it no longer has the burden of also maintaining presence; this is done by one’s graphical representation
which remains visible so long as one is connected to the
system. Although the use of avatars solves the problem of
presence, it introduces new difficulties. Avatars are touted
as providing a more expressive interface, yet they can actu1. The use of avatar to refer to these figural representations was originally
used in Habitat, an early graphical chat system [6]; at around the same
time, it was popularized in the novel Snowcrash [18].

ally limit or distort expression by providing a single
expression that overlays all of a user’s communications.
Even if an avatar has several expressions, and many do, it
is still a far cry from the subtlety of verbal expression, let
alone our physical gestures2.
Chat Circles3 is a graphical interface for synchronous
communication that does not make use of representational
graphics. Here, each participant is represented by a colored
circle on the screen in which his or her words appear. The
circles grow and brighten with each message, and they fade
and diminish in periods of silence, though they do not disappear completely so long as the participant is connected
to the chat. Participants are free to move their circles
around the screen and are motivated to do so by the system’s auditory metaphor: while one can see all the participant’s at once, one can only “hear” (that is, read the words)
of those one is sufficiently close to. Viewed over time Chat
Circles creates a visual record of conversational patterns:
one sees who are the active, animated participants and one
can watch the emergence and dissolution of conversational
groups.

2.1. The conversational interface
Figure 3 shows two screen shots from a Chat Circles
session4. Each person who is connected to the chat’s server
appear as a circle. When the user posts a message, their circle grows and accommodates the text inside it. Postings are
displayed for a few seconds (the exact time varies depending on the length of each posting) after which they gradually fade into the background. This approach mimics real

Fig. 2: The Palace is a popular avatar-based graphical
chat system.

2. The problem of creating truly expressive avatars has been the subject of
considerable research, see for instance [19].
3. Chat Circles is a research project conducted by Fernanda Viegas and
Judith Donath.
4. The images from Chat Circles are design sketches, not live screen
grabs. While a project prototype has been built, the full interface is not
yet complete.

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

2

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

Fig. 3: Two frames from a Chat Circles session. The point of view is that of the red circle (shown saying “Hello I’m
Kate”). As she moves from one location to another, different conversations are brought into focus.

life conversations where at any given time the focus is on
the words said by the person who spoke last. Over time,
those words dissipates the conversation evolves. The
sequence of growing and shrinking circles creates a pulsating rhythm on the screen that reflects the turn taking of
regular conversations.
Upon entering the system each user chooses a unique
color, which is used as a marker of identity. Although it is
well known that color is quite limited in its ability to serve
as an identifier (people can discriminate among only limited number of non-adjacent colors and once the number of
participants rises above that number, color identification
becomes ambiguous) in the context of this interface colorbased identification is quite useful. We can discriminate
among a much higher number of colors when they are
adjacent. Chat Circles is designed so that participants in a
particular discussion must be near each other on the screen;
within one’s proximate group the ability to distinguish
between say, two shades of blue will be higher than for the
screen as a whole. Furthermore, the multiple colors, along
with the round shapes and animated motions, contribute to
the lively aura of the interface.
Identity is also marked by location, for participants will
tend to remain in the same spot for extended periods of
time. Finally, participants are also identified by name written as a small label on the side of each circle.
One’s overall level of activity is conveyed through the
brightness of one’s circle, the recently active being brightest and the idle ones dimmest. As we mentioned earlier,
one of the benefits of graphical chats is that participants
can see the size of the conversational group, unlike in textbased ones, where the lurkers are invisible. Yet the appearance of a crowded, avatar-filled room is misleading if most
of those depicted are not contributing – and may, in reality,

be far from their computers. By fading the circles of nonparticipants, Chat Circles can indicate both the overall
number of connected users and the actual level of presence
and activity.
Chats often have numerous conversations occurring at
once, a phenomenon that makes following any discussion
an exercise in winnowing through non-sequitors. Simply
having a graphical interface does not solve the problem people can still respond to statements scattered across the
screen without indicating which remarks they are addressing. We have implemented an auditory metaphor that we
believe will encourage conversational threads to become
spatially localized. Each circle has a “zone of hearing”
around it: while one can see all the circles on the screen,
only for those within one’s zone can the words been seen.
This is illustrated in Figure 3; the two images show how a
user’s view varies as she moves from one part of the screen
to another. Thus, to follow a conversation one must move
close to it. Activity (but no words) is still visible elsewhere
in the space; if sufficiently intrigued, one can move to a
new spot and follow another discussion. This not only
serves to separate threads, but also gives people a greater
awareness of the ebb and flow of particular discussions.

2.2. The archival interface
On-line chats, although ephemeral by nature, are also
intrinsically recordable. Recordable, but not necessarily
readable: logs of chats read much like unedited transcripts
of speech. Furthermore, non-textual components of the
“speech” [3], such as pauses and turn-taking behavior,
which can be quite key to fully understanding the nature of
a discussion [15], are lost in regular log files.

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

3

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

Fig. 4: The graphical interface to the Chat Circles archives. Each vertical line shows the activity of one participant; the
horizontal lines are postings. Highlighting shows who was within hearing range of the selected participant at any given time.

The abstract graphics of Chat Circles lends itself to creating a visual archive, one that is self-documenting in its
highlighting of salient events. We have developed Conversation Landscape, an interface to visualize the conversational archive of Chat Circles.
Conversation Landscape (Fig. 4) is a two-dimensional.
model of the conversation, in which the participants (again
identified by color) are arrayed along the x axis and the y
axis represents time. Postings are shown as horizontal
lines; the wider the line, the longer the message. The com-

ings and goings of the participants and the rhythm of the
discussions are revealed in the visual pattern
The viewer can interact with this visualization to see
individual conversations and read the postings (Fig. 5). One
can focus on an individual interaction history by selecting
one person’s thread (a vertical line). That thread is highlighted, along with the portions of other threads that were
within hearing range of the selected one. This allows us to
quickly see who was talking to whom at any point of the
conversation. Selecting a horizontal bar brings up the text
of that posting. Selecting a thread or posting is done by
simply moving the cursor over it: the goal is to make the
Conversation Landscape an easily explored social space.
Conversation Landscape is designed to reveal the interaction patterns of the conversation at a glance. Clusters of
activity – logins and log-outs, flurries of animated discussion – become evident as do periods of silence. With every
user's history displayed on the screen, lurkers as well as
those who dominate conversations are recognizable. The
interface creates a snapshot of an entire conversation in one
image.

3. Loom
Fig. 5: Selecting and reading a posting in the archive
visualization

Loom5 is a visualization tool for Usenet groups. It creates visualizations of the participants and interactions in a

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

4

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

threaded newsgroup. The renderings reveal patterns indicative of a person’s role in the community and of the type of
discussion prevalent in a particular group. The name Loom
refers both to the “threads” of a Usenet group and to the
appearance of the visualization: the patterns and texture of
the events within the group are reflected in the patterns and
texture of this digital fabric.
Starting with a basic gridded layout – individual participants are listed along one axis, time is the other axis – we
are experimenting with a series of visualization that highlight patterns of individual activity, thread creation, emotional tone, etc. in the various groups. Our goal here is
twofold. We are interested in providing a visual interface
for browsing the newsgroups archives that will help the
viewer perceive the social patterns that are often obscured
in a text-only interface. We are also interested in developing visualizations that will provide a sort of visual thumbprint of each group – images that will let the viewer
quickly ascertain the atmosphere of each group.

3.1. Message patterns
In the most basic setting of Loom dots represent individual postings. Figure 6 shows this view in a rendering of the
newsgroup soc.culture.greek. In this view, dots represent
individual postings. Even this simplest of visualizations
reveals interesting patterns: we can easily spot the most
vociferous members of the group and can see patterns of
activity, such as those who log in at regular, daily intervals
vs. those whose participation is more irregular.
5. Loom is a research project conducted by Karrie Karahalios and Judith
Donath

Fig. 6: Loom showing individual postings.

Another setting of Loom traces the connections between
sequential posts in a thread. (Newsgroups are threaded discussions, meaning that individual topics can, more or less,
be traced through the subject line and chains of replies.).
(Fig. 7). Here, lines connect the thread as it passes from
person to person.
The two images in Figure 7 are renderings in this view
of two different newsgroups. The one on the right is from
soc.culture.greek, an active and often argumentative newsgroup covering Greek history, sports, food, and especially,
politics and relations with Turkey. The image on the left is
from comp.lang.java.gui, a focussed, technical forum. The
picture of soc.culture.greek shows much more intricate
threading, with the conversation moving rapidly from user
to user. The technical group, on the other hand, shows

soc.culture.greek

comp.lang.java.gui

Fig. 7: Two frames from Loom showing the connection between postings in the same thread. The two newsgroups differ
significantly in their interaction style and this difference is vsible in the linked thread pattern.

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

5

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

Fig. 8: Loom can be used as a newsreader.

mostly short threads – the pattern formed by question and
answer sequences.
This view also reveals individual patterns. For instance,
in the image from soc.culture.greek we see several standalone messages. Some of these are simply comments or
announcements, others are the postings of users known for
their persistent and annoying provocations – users whose
statements are generally ignored. Note, for instance, the
user who appears slightly below the center of the image – a
writer of many messages, almost none of which has garnered a response.
Silence, in the real world, is an important communicative device; ignoring someone’s remarks can be a very
pointed form of social censure. In a text-based medium,
silence can be too subtle to serve such a purpose. (It has
been observed on-line that people will announce that they
are going to ignore someone in order to make their silence
noticeable [4].) By visualizing the conversational patterns,
these elusive social cues can be seen; if the visualization is
itself the interface to the conversation, it can bring these
cues to bear on the interactions within the group.
Loom’s connected thread visualization begins to paint a
portrait both of the group as a whole and of the individuals
within it. By using color to highlight relevant patterns, we
can easily see which groups are places of long, intricate,
never-ending discussions and which are sites of quick
exchanges. We can also learn something about the role of
particular individuals in the group, seeing the loquacious
and the terse, the helpful answerers and the lone orators.

3.2. Content patterns
The Loom visualizations we have looked at thus far are
derived from basic data about the message: author, time
and subject. Nothing is known about the message content.

While we can infer some characteristics from these message sending patterns, this data can provide only a limited
view of the style and structure of the group. In order to
attain a deeper and more nuanced picture, it is necessary to
look at the content of the messages themselves.
In this section, we introduce an approach to visualizing
the messages by classifying them into categories which are
then displayed as color-coded dots. The layout is the same
as in the last section; the goal here is to explore a set of
content-based patterns.
There are numerous possible ways to categorized messages. Categories can be based on the identity or affiliation
of the writer, on whether the note posed a question or
answered one, on the grammatical soundness of writing,
etc. Here we present an experiment in categorizing postings according to mood. We used soc.culture.greek as our
test-bed and the question we posed was to see if there were
patterns to the outbreaks of flaming that occurred on this
rather contentious newsgroup and, ultimately, to see if they
were they related to inflammatory outside events and anniversaries.
The first task is to create the categories. We began by
using what are considered to be the basic affective states:
angry, sad, happy and peaceful [11]. However, the newsgroup did not fully span that range of emotions; prone to
conflict, the classifications fell primarily into the angry and
peaceful categories. Adjusting the categories to fit better
with the material, we came up with the set angry, peaceful,
informative and other. This selection provided a palette
with an improved category distribution. Yet it is not an
ideal set, for the two categories “informative” and “other”
are not emotive states, and the latter is simply a default.
Still, they are a reasonable starting point; most usefully, the
resulting classifications provide cues for other cluster foci.
The next task is to classify each of the messages into
one of the given categories.Loom currently uses a simple
decision making algorithm that classifies each message
according to a weighted sum of the category expressions it
matches. For “anger” these expressions include a phrase
written in all capitals, excessive punctuation patterns such
as multiple exclamation marks (!!!!!,!?!?!), profanities, etc.
For “information” the parser looks for newsfeeds, historical references, city names, dates of events, election results,
etc. The clustering algorithm used in this implementation
of Loom is tailored to the soc.culture.greek newsgroup.
Encoding knowledge about the context of the messages
improves its ability to classify them, but at the expense of
generality.
The result of this classification.is shown in Figure 9.
Here, red dots represent angry postings – clearly the predominant mood of this group. As a signature or portrait of
the group, this image is quite striking – one can quickly
ascertain that if disputation is not of interest, this is a place

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

6

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

3.3. Future Work

Fig. 9: Loom as a visualization of mood.

to avoid. Yet for understanding the interactions within this
group, this classification scheme is too general. One incorporating subclassifications or gradations of anger would
reveal more of the underlying patterns. Alternatively, unsupervised cluster selection could be used to create a fresh
and enlightening perspective on the social patterns of the
newsgroup.
There has been considerable work done in automatic
text classification is used today in a variety of applications.
Filters for email that use regular expressions to group
incoming messages are readily available in commercial
packages. Flame detectors for email have been created that
use feature-based rules [16]. Spam detectors also exist;
some of them also incorporate user feedback in the detection [9]. Related work in information retrieval includes recognizing the point of view of a message [14], creating
similarity clusters of text [2] and self-organizing similarity
maps [8]. Still, automatic text classification remains a difficult problem, especially when the categories are defined by
complex or subjective social features.
Some of the difficulty comes from the many and complex rules that need to be stated to encode our everyday
knowledge[7]. Loom, for example, though it has an extensive rule-base, still misclassifies a number of messages,
including those that feature sarcasm, misspellings or nonEnglish fonts. And, although the rule-base can be made
arbitrarily complete, the classification of messages according to tone is an inherently subjective task, both in the
choice of categories and in the classification of messages.
Even human readers will disagree about the tone in the
more ambiguous messages (see [16] for an extensive example).

Loom is a work-in-progress. Our goal is develop a platforms for visualizing threaded conversations, one which
gives the viewer the ability to highlight a variety of patterns
and explore different ways of viewing the social landscape.
We are adding a set of view modifiers that will allow the
viewer to easily highlight relevant patterns, such as who
starts many threads or who responds consistently. We are
also exploring ways of meaningfully ordering the list of
participants. The current implementation has some scaleability; we are developing ways to smoothly transition
from a distant overview to a detailed close-up. Finally, we
are continuing to explore the complex issues involved in
mapping social data to color, shape and location.
The “fabric” Loom weaves is metaphorical; in reality, it
is an interactive display that functions as a newsreader. We
are also interested in taking the fabric metaphor literally.
For centuries, quilts, blankets, tapestries have been used to
capture a story in a visual form. With new electronic
threading technologies [12], Loom can be used to create a
physical manifestation of the history of a newsgroup discussion. The warp threads in the fabric would provide the
timescale for the conversational record and the thickness
created by the weft threads in the fabric provide a texture
that can be sensed by touch and sight. The recording and
retrieval in physical form provides a poetic link between
the form and content of the interface.

4. Visualizing conversation
Chat Circles and Loom provide two answers to the
question: What does an on-line conversation look like?
Although they are quite different in the type of data they
visualize, as well as in their approach to obtaining that
data, they share some key elements. Most notably, they are
both abstract representations that attempt to convey a sense
of the participants’ identities and behaviors and that show
the ebb and flow of conversational activity.
As examples of social visualizations, the design of these
two projects involves a shared set of design issues:
•

Data choice: What is the data to be visualized?

The choice of what data to display is determined by the
goal of the project. Looking at newsgroups, a linguist
might be most interested in word distribution, a marketer in
the software used to post messages. In our field of social
visualization, interesting data can be patterns of participation and response, thread development, the changing mood
of messages, etc.
The goal of Chat Circles is to improve the experience of
multi-user real-time mediated conversation. Here, one of
the key pieces of data to be visualized was simply the sim-

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

7

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

ple display of who is connected to the chat; other aspects of
the visualization, such as threading by visual proximity,
were also chosen with the goal of improving an active conversation interface.
The goal of Loom is to explore patterns that are not ordinarily perceivable by simply perusing the conversational
archive. Mood – and anger in particular – was chosen as a
feature to explore because it is a pervasive and often overwhelming feature of this (and other) newsgroups, but the
patterns of flame-war flare-ups are not easy to discern.
•

Data generation: Where does the data come from?
Can it be computationally derived from text itself or
does it require input from the participants? If the latter,
what motivates them to do so?

In Chat Circles, the salient visual data – circle location
and size – is generated by the participants in the course of
their interactions with each other. The depiction of the conversation over time is derived directly from this visual
record; there is no computational analysis involved. Here
the visualization is created by redesigning the conversational interface to make the graphics integral to the experience.
Loom, on the other hand, creates its visualization by
analyzing and categorizing the archives of a newsgroup.
People worldwide participate in Usenet newsgroups, all
sharing a common text-based standard. Changing the interface to include exchanges of graphical or other meta-data
might be desirable, but it is not practicable. Thus, the visualization must extract the data from the existing textual
material; the challenge here is both the definition of the
categories and the formation of heuristics by which to classify them.
•

Data mapping: What are appropriate mappings of data
to color, shape, and location? How does the resulting
representation reflect the ambiance of the discussion?

Viewed superficially, both these projects could be
described as “colored circles placed on a screen”. Although
they share a common element – the colored circle – its use
is quite different in each.
Color in Chat Circles is purely discriminate. Indeed, it
is one of the challenges in this project to find a palette of
colors that will not inadvertently suggest meaningful interpretation: a bright yellow circle might appear to be cheerful, and a dull brown one depressed, regardless of the
actual mood of the participant or the content of the speech.
Loom, on the other hand, in its affective view uses some
common cultural meanings that are attached to colors to
supplement the visualization. Although the visualization
requires only the discrimination of the moods, it is so culturally ingrained to think of “anger” as red that the display

would have seemed incorrect had we chosen, say blue, for
that category.
We are working with circles and other simple geometric
elements for several reasons. Our interest in abstract visual
representations of conversation has to do with both what
they do and do not convey. By rendering the conversation
as a visual entity, we hope to give people a better sense of
many of the social patterns that it is difficult to perceive in
a computer-mediated discussion. Our goal is to clarify and
to highlight what is already there; we wish to avoid introducing spurious and potentially misleading information, as
it is all to easy to do with figural representations.[1]
•

Impact: How does the interface affect the dynamics of
the conversational group? What does the visualization
reveal about the social interactions?

Both Chat Circles and Loom are in the early stages of
development, too early to provide feedback about user
experience. With Chat Circles our concern is with a participatory interface: not only must it be theoretically interesting and visually striking, but it must also be simple and
intuitive enough for people to use it regularly. The question
we then face is how to evaluate it – what makes a conversation “better”? With Loom, our concern is with seeing patterns in a conversational archive. Our analysis of its
efficacy involves both evaluating the choice of data and the
method of visualization, either of which can be changed
independently of the other.
A conversation is far more than an exchange of information. It is a complex social interaction in which the words
people say (or write) are only one part of the message. By
building visual interfaces to on-line conversations and their
archives, our goal is to increase the ability of this medium
– computer-mediated discussion – to carry subtler and
more nuanced messages, both by giving people a richer
environment in which to interact and by providing them
with greater insight into the underlying social patterns of
their virtual community.

References
[1] Arnheim, Rudolf. 1969. Visual Thinking. CA: University of
California Press.
[2] Berthold, Michael et. al. “Clustering on the Net: Applying an
autoassociative neural network to computer-mediated discussions”.Journal of Computer Mediated Communication 2 (4),
1997.
[3] Cherny, Lynn. 1995. The MUD register: conversational
modes of action in a text-based virtual reality Ph.D. dissertation. Stanford University.

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

8

Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1999

[4] Donath, J. 1998. Identity and deception in the virtual community. In (Kollock, P. and Smith, M. eds.) Communities in
Cyberspace. London: Routledge.

[13]Reid, Elizabeth. 1991. Electropolis: Communication and
community on internet relay chat. Thesis, Dept. of History,
University of Melbourne.

[5] Donath, J. and Robertson, N. 1994b. The sociable web. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International World Wide Web Conference, Chicago, IL.

[14]Sack, W. "On the Computation of Point of View". Proceedings of the National Conference of Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI 94), July 31-August 4, 1994, Seattle, WA.

[6] Goldberg, D., Nichols, D., Oki, B., and Terry, D. “Using collaborative filtering to weave an Information Tapestry”. Communications of the ACM. 35, 12, December 1992.

[15]Saville-Troike, Muriel. 1982. The Ethnography of Communication. 2nd Edition. New York, NY: Basil Blackwell.

[7] Haase, K. "FramerD: Representing knowledge in the large”.
IBM Systems Journal 35 (3 & 4), 1996.
[8] Honkela, Timo; Lagus, Krista; Kaski, Samuel and Kohonen,
Teuvo. 1998. WEBSOM - Self-Organizing Maps for Internet
Exploration. http://websom.hut.fi/websom/
[9] L-Soft International. 1998. LISTSERV® – The mailing list
management classic. http://www.lsoft.com/listserv.stm
[10]Morningstar, Chip and Farmer, F. Randall. 1990. The lessons
of Lucasfilm's Habitat. In (M. Benedikt, ed.) Cyberspace:
First Steps. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
[11]Picard, Rosalind. Affective Computing. The MIT Press.
1997.
[12]Post, R., Orth, M. "Wearable Fabric". International Symposium on Wearable Computing.1997.

[16]Spertus, Ellen. Smokey: Automatic Recognition of Hostile
Messages. http://www.ai.mit.edu/people/ellens/smokey.html
[17]Sproull, L., Walker, J., Subramani, R., Kiesler, S., and
Waters, K. n.d.. When the interface is a face. Forthcoming in
Human-Computer Interaction.
[18]Stephenson, Neal. 1992. Snow Crash. New York: Bantam
Books.
[19]Vilhjálmsson,Hannes Högni. 1996. Autonomous Communicative Behaviors in Avatars. Master’s Thesis, MIT Media
Lab.
[20]Therrien, Charles W. Decision Estimation and Classification.
John Wiley & Sons, 1989.
[21]Tufte, Edward. 1990. Envisioning Information. Cheshire,
CT: Graphics Press.

0-7695-0001-3/99 $10.00 (c) 1999 IEEE

9

