From: AAAI Technical Report SS-96-02. Compilation copyright © 1996, AAAI (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Remembrance Agent:
A continuously running automated information retrieval

system

Bradley J. Rhodes
MITMediaLab, E 15-305
20 AmesSt.
Cambridge, MA02139 rhodes@media.mit.edu
Thad Starner
MITMedia Lab, E15-394
20 AmesSt.
Cambridge, MA02139 thad@media.mit.edu
Abstract
The Remembrance Agent (RA) is a program which
augments humanmemoryby displaying a list of documents which might be relevant to the user’s current
context. Unlike most information retrieval systems,
the RAruns continuouslywithout user intervention. Its
unobtrusive interface allows a user to pursue or ignore
the RA’ssuggestions as desired.

Beyond simple memoryenhancement, the RAalso suggests alternative ways to organize knowledge. The connection between a suggested documentand the user’s current
context maynot be obvious to the user until pointed out. In
this waythe RAboth helps the user organize their owndatafiles into newcategories, and helps create continuousbrainstorming session where new ideas and possible connections
are suggested.

The RemembranceAgent
Mostof a desktop computer’stime is spent waiting: waiting
for the user to hit the next keystroke, waitingfor the user to
read the next page, and waiting for the next packet to come
downthe network. The remembranceagent uses those wasted CPUcycles constructively by performing continuous
searches for information that might be of use in its user’s
current situation. For example, while an engineer reads
email about a project the remembranceagent reminds her of
project schedules, status reports, and other resources related
to the project in question. Whenshe stops reading email and
starts editing a file, the RAautomatically changesit recommendationsaccordingly. These suggestions are presented in
the form of one-line summariesat the bottom of the screen.
Here they can be easily monitored, but won’t distract from
the primary workat hand. The full text of a suggestion can
be brought up with a single keystroke.
Most applications for augmenting humanmemory,e.g.
those developed by (Jones 1986) and (Lamming& Flynn
1994), have concentrated on recall-on-demand. For example, they can answerquestions such as "whenis that conference paper deadline?". However, they do not address
situations wherea user does not rememberenoughto realize
he or she has forgotten somethingin the first place. This associative formof recall is whatremindsa user that an important conference exists at all. The RemembranceAgent
augmentsthis continuous, associative formof recall.

122

Implementation
The RAfront-end runs in elisp under Emacs-19, a UNIX
based text editor which can also be used for applications
such as email, netnews, and web access. The front end displays one-line suggestions along with a numericrating indicating howrelevant it thinks the documentis. It also brings
up the full text of suggested documentswhenrequested. Every few seconds it collects the text within certain ranges
aroundthe current cursor position and sends this text to the
information retrieval program.
The back-endis a programwhich, given a query-text, produces suggestions of similar documentsfrom a pool of documents which are pre-indexed nightly. The current
implementation uses the SMART
information retrieval program, which decides documentsimilarity based on the frequency of words commonto the query and reference
documents (Salton & Lesk 1971). While SMART
is not
sophisticated as manymore modern information-retrieval
systems, it has the advantagethat it requires no humanpreprocessing of the documentsbeing indexed.
In the current version the RAutilizes two sources of suggestions. Thefirst three lines print suggestionsfromthe last
year’s worth of personal email (a little over 60 Megabytes
worth). The last line prints suggestions from about 7 Megabytes of notes files entered over the past few years. The

Figure 1: A screen-shot from the Remembrance
Agent
short, one-line description of email messagescontains who
the messagewas from, whenit wassent, and the subject line
of the message.The one-line description of notes files contains the filename, the ownerof the file, date last modified,
and the first few wordsof the document.
The RAshould be able to suggest documents similar to
tangents in a documentas well as those similar to the whole.
At different times a user might be interested in suggestions
relating to the person who’snamewas just typed, to the last
paragraph typed, or relating to a muchbroader range. To
achieve this, three "scopes"are defined for a document,centered aroundthe current cursor location. Onescope is dedicated to those suggestions relevant to the last thousand
words (usually the entirety of the document). Another
dedicated to the last fifty words,and a third to the last ten
words. Each scope accesses either the email or text database, and is allotted one or more display lines. The number
of wordseach scope covers, the numberof display lines each
uses, the time betweenupdates, and the database each points
to are all customizableby the user.

DesignIssues
There are three .different waysof handling the timing of an
automatedtask. The first is to performa task only whenspecifically requested. Spell-checking a file and performinga
web-search fall into this category. A second wayis for an
automatedtask to alwayslurk in the background,but to only
act whena specific "trigger" occurs. Suchprogramsinclude
calendar programsthat automatically tell you whenyou’re
going to be late for a meeting, and programsthat alert you
123

whenyou have new email waiting. Finally, there are tasks
which are performed continuously, like a clock programor
CPU-loadmeter. The RAfalls into this third category.
Unlike programs which warn you about important meetings, it is usually not a major problemwhenthe user misses
suggestions presented by the RA. However, since the RA
runs continuously, suggestions could quickly distract from
the user’s primarytask if they attracted too muchattention.
For these reasons the RA’ssuggestions are kept unobtrusive. Suggestionsare kept to a single line each, and are always printed at the bottom of the text-editor window.The
full display area is also limited to a maximum
of 9 lines,
thoughit defaults to operating with only three or four. Finally, no color cues or highlights were used in the suggestion-display area.
It is often the case that just seeing the one-line description
triggers the entire memory,with no need to bring up the full
document.Also, in somecases the description line supplies
desired information directly (for example, the last nameof
someonewhosent email). For this reason, as muchinformation as possible is packedinto the short description line.
Whilesuggestionsare unobtrusive, it is easy to access the
entirety of a suggested document.To view the documentbeing suggestedon a given line, the user simplytypes "controlc" and the display line-number. It is similarly easy to get
back to the primary document.
As an additional feature, the user can explicitly ask for
recommendationsbased on an input string. Whenthis method is used to receive suggestions, all the display lines are
used to present the top possible suggestions, and the scope

Knowledge transfer
Oneof the large difficulties facing industry is bringing new
membersof an existing work-groupup to speed quickly. If
a work-group created its own knowledge-base, new members could access the group RemembranceAgent. This
would not only give the employee access to the group
knowledgeitself (as wouldany database), but also to the
meta-knowledgeof whenparticular information is relevant
or valuable. Similar applications would exist wherever
"just-in-time training" is required. Whilethis application
uses a knowledgebase not familiar to the user at first, they
will not suffer too greatly from the lack-of-context problem
discussed above because the knowledgeis focused on their
current situation, namely their new position within the
group. Anycontext they do not yet know,they need to learn
anyway,and the RAwill help them learn it.

information is ignored. The scope information is similarly
ignored whenthe user reads email. Email messagesusually
contains a single thought, so suggestions based on the entire
email are usually more useful than those based on smaller
ranges.
Using the system has shownthat suggestions are much
more useful whenthe documentbeing suggested only contains one "nugget" of information, and whenthat nugget is
clearly displayed on its one-line description. This "less is
more"approachsolves several problems.First, it allows the
user to tell what a suggestion contains from its description
without having to peruse the entire document. Second, a
documentwith only one primary point is more likely to be
a good hit. Documentswhich address several issues will
rarely matchthe user’s situation exactly, but will often partially match. Finally, if a suggested documentis read, the
shorter it is the quickerthe user can get on with their primary
work. Old email are a good length for RAsuggestions.
Several of the applications described in the next section
use the RAto suggest documentsthe user has never seen before. Whilethis maybe a powerfulapplication, there are extra pitfalls when using someone else’s database. The
primarypitfall is that the user will not have the context associated with a given suggestion. This makesit far less likely that the user will recognize a documentfrom its one-line
summary,and it will be far moredifficult for themto judge
whether a suggestion is useful. Anotherproblemis that the
user won’t necessarily knowthe original context in which a
document was created. For example, they might not know
that a set of instructions weremadein jest, or werein a subsequent message shownto be incorrect. Similarly, documentation or lectures geared towards one kind of audience
maybe inappropriate for another, causing the original
speaker’s intention to be misinterpreted. Finally, there are
privacy issues when using someone else’s "memories."
Even if you access someone’semail files with their express
permission, the people whosent that person mail might not
have approved.

Wearable computing
Whenrunning on a desktop computer, an RAcan only
guess the user’s context based on the documentthey are
reading or editing. However,the advent of wearable computing (Starner et al. 1995) will allow RAsto work with
muchmore information and manymore situations. Global
Positioning Systems (GPS) will let the RAknowwhere the
user is, while cameraand face recognition will let it know
whothey’re talking to. Withthis extra information,a (greatly enhanced) RAcould knowthat it is around lunch time,
that according to camerainput the user is with her lunch
date, according to her appointmentbook she has an appointment with her boss in an hour, and according to her GPS
she’s downtown.Fromthis information it could recommend
several goodrestaurants knownfor their fast service that are
within a few blocks of downtown,which wouldbe agreeable
to her lunch date as well.

Future Applications
Reference advisor for technical papers
Oneapplication is to have the RAsuggest technical reports
on a given subject. Whenit recommends
other researchers’
papers, these could be referenced or tagged for later reading.
Whenit recommendsone’s own old papers, these can be
scannedfor similar material which might be used in the new
paper. Such a system could also recommendconferences
wherethe call-for-papers is similar in content to one’s own
paper.

124

Automatic Hypertexting
In the past year several on-line magazineshave appeared,
such as HotWired (HotWired), many of which have paper
counterparts. One of the values added by the on-line versions of these magazines are hyper-linked text, where a
reader can click on a word and get moreinformation on that
subject. A future RAcould conceivably automatically turn
normal email, netnews, or papers into hyper-linked documents, automatically linking hot-words to relevant background information.
Background checker
Another Web-based RA could perform background
checks on people sending mail, referenced in papers, or recognized by a wearable-computer-mountedcamera. Such an
RAcould automatically provide information on a person’s

employer,job title, phonenumbers,and profiles of their interests based on newsgroupsthey frequent. At the click of a
button, the user could access that person’s home-pagefor
even more information.

References
HotWired. http://www.hotwired.com/
Jones, W. 1986. On the Applied Use of HumanMemory
Models: the MemoryExtender Personal Filing System. The
International Journal of Man-Machine
Studies 25, 191-228
Lamming,M., and Flynn, M. 1994. "Forget-me-not:" Intimate Computing in Support of HumanMemory. In Proceedings of FRIEND21,’94 International Symposiumon
Next Generation HumanInterface, MeguroGajoen, Japan.
Salton, G. ed. 1971. The SMART
Retrieval System -- Experiments in Automatic Document Processing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Starner, T., Mann,S., Rhodes, B., Healey, J., Russell, K.,
Levine, J., and Pentland, A. 1995. WearableComputingand
AugmentedReality, Technical Report, Media Lab Vision
and Modeling Group RT-355, MIT
Wickens, C. 1992. Engineering Psychology and Human
Performance. Scott ForesmanLittle Brown.

125

