Parallel Eyes: Exploring Human Capability and Behaviors with Paralleled First
Person View Sharing
Shunichi Kasahara†, Mitsuhito Ando‡, Kiyoshi Suganuma‡and Jun Rekimoto†
†SonyCSL, Tokyo Univ, Tokyo, Japan, ‡YCAM Interlab, Yamaguchi, Japan
kasahara@csl.sony.co.jp, ando@ycam.jp, suga@ycam.jp and rekimoto@acm.org

Abstract
Our research explores how humans can understand and develop
viewing behaviors with mutual paralleled first person view sharing
in which a person can see others’ first person video perspectives as
well as their own perspective in realtime. We developed a paralleled
first person view sharing system which consists of multiple video
see-through head mounted displays and an embedded eye tracking
system. With this system, four persons can see four shared first person videos of each other. We then designed a simple chasing game
with our view sharing system and studied the human behavior. Our
results show that people can develop their viewing behaviors to understand their own physical embodiment and spatial relationship
with others in complex situations. Our Insights derived from Parallel Eyes will contribute to building design experience in paralleled
view sharing and exploring augmentation of human embodiment.
Keywords: Video Communication, Shared Experiences, Wearable, First Person Video, Embodiment
Concepts: •Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in
interaction design;

1

Figure 1: Parallel Eyes: a system for creating a mutual visual
shared parallel experience. With Parallel Eyes, users wear a head
mounted display which shows shared videos of each other’s perspectives as well as one’s own perspective in realtime.

Introduction

As small wearable networked cameras emerge as common technologies, first person video is becoming a significant form of media for sharing one’s experiences. The combination of a wearable
camera and a head mounted display (HMD) will provide significant
benefits for parallel experiences in various applications. The relationship between visual perspective and embodiment is tightly connected. Therefore, connecting, unbinding and reconstructing those
relationship will provide an interesting field of research ,art and
technical development to produce brand-new experiences [Hachiya
1993] [Philippe et al. 2014] [Kasahara and Rekimoto 2015]. We
think that mutual view sharing is one of the possible configurations
to augmenting human embodiment. It will produce a practical impact upon education, reality games, technology mediated sports and
entertainment.
To explore this scenario, we developed a “Parallel Eyes system”
which is a system in which users wear a HMD which shows multiple shared first person video perspectives as well as one’s own perspective in realtime. This system generates a mutual visual shared
parallel experience among four persons in realtime (Fig. 1). Our
aim is to investigate and analyze how humans develop their viewing
behaviors to acquire their own embodiment and spatial relationship
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s). c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
SIGGRAPH 2016 VR Village, July 24-28, 2016, Anaheim, CA
ISBN: 978-1-4503-4377-0/16/07
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2929490.2929495

in such paralleled visual sharing situations. Therefore, we designed
the “game of tag” with Parallel Eyes.

2

Parallel Eyes System

To create a mutual visual shared parallel experience and to investigate and analyze how humans acquire and develop their behaviors,
we developed the Parallel Eyes system. With Parallel Eyes, users
wear a HMD which shows each other’s shared perspectives as well
as one’s own perspective in realtime. Furthermore, the embedded
eye tracking camera reveals how users watch displayed paralleled
shared first person video.
The Parallel Eyes system includes a HMD (Google Cardboard) with
a smartphone screen as shown in Fig. 2. The smartphone also has a
camera that captures the wearer’s field of vision so that we can create a video see-through HMD. Four head mounted smartphones are
connected via a wireless connection. The video captured from the
camera of the smartphone is displayed on the smartphone screen,
and it is additionally transmitted to other head mounted smartphones. On each smartphone display, the wearer can see a video
stream of the others’ fields of view as well as one’s own perspective. These video images are displayed with a four split layout as
shown in Fig. 1. To investigate and visualize unconscious watching
behaviors , we embedded a eye tracking system including small IR
camera and IR-LED inside the head mounted smartphone goggles.

2.1

Game of tag with Parallel Eyes

In a “game of tag with Parallel Eyes”, players play a game of tag
with the Parallel Eyes on a specially designed stage (Fig. 4). On
the game stage, several cardboard columns were placed at regular

(a)

(b)

P1

P2

P1

P2

*3

P4

*1
P3

Figure 2: A wearable system for Parallel Eyes: a video see-through
HMD, a small board computer, and a small battery module attached
to the body.

P3

P4

P4

P3

*2

*4

(c)

(d)

P1

P2

P1

P2
P3

*6
P3

P4

P3

P4

*5

P3

P4
P1

(e)
P1

(f)
P2

P1

P2
P3

P3

Figure 3: Stage design of chasing game. Cardboard columns are
placed at regular intervals.
P3

intervals (Fig. 3). In addition, there is a large projector screen to
display four streamed perspective images and eye tracking pointers
of each players. This is also essential setup to provide the sense
of the each player’s viewing behavior in real-time, which also produces engaging experience for the audience of the games.
In the beginning, some participants found it very confusing to walk
around; however, by guiding them to find their own perspective (for
instance, having them look down to find their own foot), they found
a way to recognize their own body. In the earlier stage of the game,
several participants were astonished when they found themselves in
the perspective of the chaser. However, as the game proceeded, they
got used to Parallel Eyes and started to develop viewing strategies.
Observation of actual games revealed that people can develop their
viewing behaviors to understand their own physical embodiment
and spatial relationship with others in complex situations [Kasahara et al. 2016]. We found that viewing strategies were pursued
in accordance with two successive factors. The first one is a visual
“attention cue,” which made the person find something that is related to their own body. The second is “context building,” where the
person understands the relationships between the attention cue and
their own body, then produces information to determine the next
action. The revealed patterns of viewing behaviors indicate design
factors for both conscious and unconscious action. Those findings
led to design implications which will contribute to building design
experience in mutual paralleled view sharing applications, brand

P4

P3

*7

P4
P3

Figure 5: Example of moments during game of tag with Parallel
Eyes. Traces of color line indicate eye movement history of each
player. (a) shows moment when P1(Player 1) found chaser (*1)
in P2’s view, P3 is in the “stealth” mode (*2). (b) shows that P1
is looking at P2 (chaser’s) view (*3), P3 found his own (*4) in
P4’s view (c) shows that P4 is escaping using the perspective of
the chaser P3 (*5). (d) shows that P2 and P4(*6) are engaged in
watching the event between P1 and P3. (e) shows the moment when
P3 unconsciously a found item (*7) with a similar color to their
own clothing. (f) shows the moment when P3 could be found in
other 3 views.

new technology mediated sports and broad research agenda about
human perspective and embodiment.

References
H ACHIYA , K. 1993. Inter dis-communication machine. Prix Ars
Electronica 96, 138–139.
K ASAHARA , S., AND R EKIMOTO , J. 2015. Jackin head: Immersive visual telepresence system with omnidirectional wearable
camera for remote collaboration. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, ACM,
New York, NY, USA, VRST ’15, 217–225.
K ASAHARA , S., A NDO , M., S UGANUMA , K., AND R EKIMOTO ,
J. 2016. Parallel eyes: Exploring human capability and behaviors with paralleled first person view sharing. In Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA, CHI ’16, 1561–1572.

Figure 4: Game of tag with Parallel Eyes : Participants play a
game of tag with Parallel Eyes on a specially designed stage.

P HILIPPE , B., G ONZ ÁLEZ -F RANCO , D., P OINTEAU , A., AND
C HERENE , C. 2014. The machine to be another - embodied
telepresence using human performers. Prix Ars Electronica.

