CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2

April 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA

Conversation Clusters: Grouping Conversation Topics
through Human-Computer Dialog

k

ar

s

n et i m i st ic
op

pr
al a

s

po

am
f

c i t i z en s

s

d ro
fa

u gh t

m
in
hu e
ng
er

ne
s ig
co o c h b o r
hoo
m i et
d
m y
un
it i
es

p

e x p o rt s

r

os

n

i ne

m

et

f a r m er

g ua
t em

m
a
yan
an
is
h

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2009, April 4-9, 2009, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 978-1-60558-246-7/09/04...$5.00.

sp

Many current computational approaches to meeting archival
mirror the function of a courtroom stenographer; they document the entire discourse of the event. Searching through
these archives requires a lookup of key words, while understanding the entire discourse requires reading the entire
record. The lookup problem is made more difficult as automated speech recognition transcripts are not always accurate. We mitigate these effects by mimicking human memory to forget the actual verbal exchange but retain a generalized understanding through the use of key words. By focus-

la

This paper explores human augmented computer visualization as a means to leverage human understanding in recalling past conversation. Specifically, we look at co-located
meetings of groups where, traditionally, a designated scribe
records minutes of key meeting points. Our target meetings
have an expectation of being re-examined in the future; people refer to these minutes to review what was said.

ma

INTRODUCTION

ate

H5.3 [Information interfaces and presentation]: Group and
Organizational Interfaces - Synchronous interaction, Computer supported cooperative work.

gu

ACM Classification Keywords

ish

Clustering, Meeting Archival, Visualization

an

Author Keywords

sp

Conversation Clusters explores the use of visualization to
highlight salient moments of live conversation while archiving a meeting. Cheaper storage and easy access to recording
devices allows extensive archival. However, as the size of
the archive grows, retrieving the desired moments becomes
increasingly difficult. We approach this problem from a
socio-technical perspective and utilize human intuition aided
by computer memory. We present computationally detected
topics of conversation as visual summaries of discussion and
as reference points into the archive. To further bootstrap the
system, humans can participate in a dialog with the visualization of the clustering process and shape the development
of clustering models.

m a r k et
s
su
pp
ly
be s
oc
i et y
f it

ABSTRACT

e c s yst
o
ems

Tony Bergstrom and Karrie Karahalios
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
{abergst2, kkarahal}@cs.uiuc.edu

Figure 1. Conversation is visualized as clusters of words grouped by
topics. Each bubble indicates words that had been grouped together.
Singular words were from other potential topics float freely before they
disappear or form new clusters.

ing on the ideas conveyed and forgetting some speech, our
memories better recall the most recent and relevant moments
in conversation [11].
The key to making our approach work is combining the
strengths of man and machine. The computer has the ability
to store large archives; people have the ability to augment
their judgment based on the context at hand. We present two
archival visualizations implemented to summarize interaction: a topic view and a history view. The topic view serves
to see the topics discussed over the course of the meeting
while the history view allows the viewer to see how the
meeting progressed by mapping the evolution of topics over
time.
Leveraging People and Computers

Understanding conversation is hard. People can readily understand speech in spite of mumbling, self correction, and
ambiguous references; for computers this is more difficult.
The best speech recognition system to date can produce a 3%
word error rate on transcripts, though more common conditions incur 20-30% error rates [12]. Aside from detecting the
words to transcribe, proper understanding of speech requires
understanding semantic meanings and context, a task that is
difficult even with a perfect transcription of the most formal
language [1]. Natural Language Processing (NLP) can help
in the analysis and understanding of language, but the techniques are often limited to understanding and detecting statistical patterns in language in specified domains. Altering
the conversation’s topic, word choice, or context from that
of the training set used to create the NLP model drastically

2349

CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2

April 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA

reduces automated comprehension for the generalizable situation [15].

puted topics with human interpretation to provide a topic
labeled image of conversation.

Conversation Clusters attempts to bridge the verbal language barrier by using humans and machines. In the domain
of meetings, people understand conversations better than
computers. They can infer the context of social situations,
humor, sarcasm, body language, etc. Computers provide
significant advantages when it comes to tracking history and
storing the numerous details of interaction. By combining
these strengths, we seek to provide a reliable and intuitive
system for archiving and re-accessing conversations.

Influence of Social Displays

Capturing Social Experiences

Written language complements oral discourse as a means to
exchange ideas [14]. The predominance of literate culture
in recent history has resulted in many changes in the way
we remember and think as a society: written records act
to accurately detail events and easily disseminate information. One of the most common artifacts of aural meetings
is the transcript. They are easy to archive, store, and reread. Computer generated transcripts using speech recognition can capture verbal exchange in a similar form. They,
too, are archivable and searchable, but they are prone to errors in recognition.

We propose using a visualization in the form of a community
display to present the group status and activity of a meeting.
Prior work in this area has demonstrated that such displays
externalize the groups’ progress, allowing it to focus on core
ideas, deliberate more, and produce higher quality output
[13].
Work with conversation visualization has produced greater
interaction awareness among participants [3, 6]. Subtle feedback, such as showing individual vocal participation, promoted equal contribution during conversation. Though these
visualizations focus strictly on the aural interaction, other
visualizations have begun exploring content by using speech
recognition to detect topics and then suggesting related avenues for discussion [4].
These words suggest people can extract meaningful interaction information from shared displays during conversation
by providing augmented group awareness. We aim to provide similar feedback with Conversation Clusters.
CLUSTERING CONVERSATION

With the onset of near real-time speech recognition, researchers have explored storing days and weeks of personal transcripts generated with mobile wearable microphones that continuously record. Integrated into daily life,
the microphone produced an extensive database that could
be stored and searched [17]. With no specific query in mind,
a cursory understanding of a transcript relies on personally
skimming exact text. To date, methods such as highlighting words based on speech recognition confidence or TFIDF
scores have been used to aid in exploring these transcripts
[2, 16].

Conversation Clusters approaches dialog as a stream of ever
changing topical threads. Rather than focusing on reproducing an error free word-for-word, transcript, we detect general
topics from the words that we can reliably recognize. A
dynamic visualization on a shared public tabletop enables
participants to see the most recent discussion topics as clusters of words grouped together (Figure 1). Users can also
switch to a corresponding timeline visualization to explore
the birth and death of topics. With Conversation Clusters,
we develop a representation of conversation that captures the
context of the moment.

In meeting archival systems, researchers have automated
detection of visual and audio cues to summarize and index video [8, 9]. These environments are focused on reexperiencing the raw captured media to review events. Students have benefited from similar automated capture when
reviewing lectures with the eClass system [5]. Other systems, such as Google’s Audio Indexing1, have applied
speech recognition to automatically create searchable indices for a video recording.

Clusters

Many applications try to mitigate human involvement in
computational tasks such as parsing and object recognition.
More recently, popular websites like del.icio.us2 utilize human knowledge to tag, label, and classify the web. Smaller
groups use indices within a single document or video to
easily locate useful content[10]. All of these systems rely
on user participation. Some, like peekaboom.org, have built
games to entertain participants while capturing this information [18]. Our goal with this work is to combine the com-

1
2

http://labs.google.com/gaudi
http://del.icio.us

The first visualization demonstrates a clustering of current
and recent topics (Figure 1). Projected directly on the table, the visualization provides an ambient awareness of the
computer’s topic model which can be manipulated via Mitsubishi’s DiamondTouch table.
As the visualization occupies public conversation space, it
draws attention from the participants to the up-to-date depiction of salient topics. Though there is potential for distraction, previous work indicates conversation develops naturally as speakers prioritize their attention to conversation
and listeners examine the visualization when convenient [3,
6]. We further mitigate accidental distraction by using slow
fading transitions and reusing visual elements in the display.
If a word is being replaced in a cluster, the visualization will
fade from one word to another rather than add one word and
subtract another. However, clusters themselves are reused
only in cases where the new topic is sufficiently close to
the old (we discuss the distance metric in a later section).
Emerging topics in conversation that cannot be paired appear
as a new cluster. As a group moves into new topic areas,

2350

CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2
the shared display demonstrates the changing focus of the
meeting with multiple new topic clusters.
Words unrelated to the highest rated clusters move freely and
unbound in the visualization. These words may be from a
previous topic that is no longer being discussed or an emerging topic that may soon appear on the table. With the interactive tabletop, participants can increase the strength of a link
between the lesser topics and current clusters by dragging
the floating words into clusters. With no interaction, the
words simply demonstrate the changing pattern of topics.
As speech recognition and topic detection algorithms are not
perfect, erroneous words and glaring errors do appear and
may be removed by pressing a full hand to the word. In this
manner, people present can influence topic formation and
topic removal.
Thread History

The thread history visualization shows a historical overview
of salient topics in discourse over time. As seen in Figure
2, threads of conversation begin, merge, separate, and end
along a timeline from left to right. The computer diagrams
history by creating and displaying this model of conversation
evolution.

po or

y
et
ci
so
so ci ety

b e n e f it s

l
ia
oc

s
ma rk e t s s e c t o r

en
t

p

p ri v at e

m

f ar mer

hunger

us inve st m ent b an k
ro

Before detecting topics, we must be able to extract words
from a conversation. Our initial design calls for a dedicated
microphone for each speaker. We use an off the shelf copy of
Dragon’s Naturally Speaking3 to provide a general transcript
before clustering meaningful word topics.
Both the clusters and timeline visualizations use a sliding
window of the conversation transcript to generate topical
words. A short window in the cluster visualization ensures
only recent words appear. The timeline visualization window varies: a longer window shows more general trends
while a smaller window captures shorter lived topics. The
initial topic clusters are generated from the first utterances of
a group and are prone to fluctuation while the conversation
fills the first sliding window.
Related words are clustered by querying an Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) server with the windowed transcript [7].
ESA uses a stored version of Wikipedia as a base collection
of topics, each represented by an article. Probable topics are
identified by comparing the distribution of words in articles
to those in the query, and a list of articles are returned with a
weighted list of words that support the article (Figure 3). The
Wikipedia article titles are less informative for our purpose
than supporting words. For now, we ignore the title and use
the lists as a proxy for relatedness of words.

capitalist

st

drought

e
sp
ro

Implementation

ve

spanish

in

guatemalan
m ayan

April 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA

neighbor examp le co m mu ni

ti

Query: How do people interact with others using computers? How can we augment normal experience?
Classifications:
Augmented reality (1299.7)

ng o s

es

augment (58.8) interact (26.4) comput (21.9)

Many-worlds interpretation (1039.3)

Figure 2. The thread history visualization demonstrates the progression and change of conversational topics.

In this historical view, multiple threads appear in parallel.
This does not mean that four or five topics are being separately addressed at once, but demonstrates related topics
that are not clustered together. For example, a discussion
about car repair might have a thread about cars and another
about the financial means of payment. In the context of the
conversation they are related so they appear simultaneously.
However, the words that generate these threads do not sufficiently overlap to form a single cluster or thread. Additional
parallel threads appear as the transcript grows in size. The
thread history visualization examines the relation of clusters
over time, and the window of potential related clusters grows
proportionally. The interface allows for interactive exploration. Longer conversations are viewed at a higher level;
participants can zoom in to see a more detailed view. They
can also switch between the timeline and cluster modes of
the table visualization.
The timeline visualization creates an abstracted view summary to aid recall by filtering words upfront. The full dialog cannot be recreated from the visualization. Threads of
conversation use individual salient words to characterize the
evolving topic. The selected words allow viewers to infer
the general meaning but provide privacy for the individual
speakers.

interact (24.8) augment (22.3) experi (16.0) comput (12.8)

Motion capture (1003.7)
augment (23.1) comput (22.2) normal (13.5) interact (12.7)

Virtual reality (913.2)
comput (24.5) interact (17.6) experi (15.6) augment (15.1)

Game theory (862.0)
interact (22.6) comput (19.7) normal (19.3) experi (16.1)
Figure 3. An example of a ESA query and results.

The ESA results form the basis of the topic detection that
feeds our visualization. In our pilot study, the Wikipedia
article word distributions used by ESA eliminated erroneous
words recorded in the transcript. These words were culled
as it was unlikely for the erroneous words to appear in the
same article as many of the correctly recorded words.
Even with groups of related words, we must combine and
prune our results to avoid overwhelming participants in the
shared visualization space. As seen in Figure 3, the query
returns a list of Wikipedia articles with overlapping sets of
supportive words and an overall score of relevance to the
query. To avoid redundancy we combine topics using a
weighted sum of supporting words (Figure 4). We limit
inclusion in the visualization to results that are in the top
3

2351

http://www.nuance.com/naturallyspeaking

CHI 2009 ~ Computer Mediated Communication 2
red (25) white (19) blue (3)
color (25) pattern (20) red (5)
red (10) white (10) green (6)

200
150

red (20) white (16) blue (2) green (2)
color (25) pattern (20) red (4)

⇐

200
150
100

Figure 4. ESA results with significant overlap are combined into similar groups. The weight of the topic weight is the highest weight of the
combined topics. Individual words are combined via weighted sum.
For ‘white,’ this calculation is: (200·19+100·10)÷(200+100) = 16.

weighted results. The topics are combined after calculating
a distance between all pairs. The distance is a relative difference between the word weights of the top words; sharing
words indicates a much closer match. The pairs are combined until a maximum cutoff distance is exceeded.
As stated earlier, this is a socio-technical system. People
and machines work together to influence the clustered visualization. The first, more subtle, human-computer dialog
occurs when people edit Wikipedia. ESA then clusters the
text based on the word distribution in this socially generated
reference. Therefore, a change to Wikipedia affects the clustering each time the ESA back-end is updated. The second
human-computer dialog occurs when people interact directly
with the table to remove or swap words between clusters.
The altered clusters serve to direct the associations made in
future clusters.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Conversation Clusters is not a solution for all archiving situations. Though Wikipedia provides a vast and expansive
set of topics, we recognize it does not encompass the whole
of all possible topics. Additionally, the system cannot infer
basic information that would be obvious to a human listener
such as cause and effect. Another point we wish to make
is that people do forget, and this act of forgetting serves
a purpose. It is not the everyday interactions at the coffee
shop that we target. Conversation Clusters is aimed at conversations that anticipate a retrospective analysis: a board
meeting, a public record, or a series of interviews.
In future work, we hope to include imagery to support individual contribution and conversational context to provide a
picture of conversation featuring the interplay of actors and
their roles. As seen in previous works [3, 6], participant
contribution can serve as meaningful imagery to understand
interaction. Incorporating personal interaction patterns, we
can hope to demonstrate the meaningful contributions and
information persona of each individual. Finally, we plan to
study this tool used in meetings at a nearby consulting firm.
CONCLUSION

As society archives an ever increasing amount of material,
searching through the vast amount of data and uncovering
salient moments becomes increasingly difficult. Conversation Clusters illustrates techniques that can be used to identify relevant moments in otherwise unstructured archival by
combining human intuition and inference with the computational affordances of computers to create a human-computer
dialog.

April 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation, NSF-0643502.
REFERENCES

1. J. Allen. Natural language understanding.
Benjamin-Cummings Publishing Co. 2nd ed, 1995.
2. S. Basu, S. Gupta, M. Mahajan, P. Nguyen, and J. C.
Platt. Scalable summaries of spoken conversations. In
Proc of IUI, 267–275, 2008. ACM.
3. T. Bergstrom and K. Karahalios. Seeing More:
Visualizing Audio Cues. In Proc of Interact, 2007.
4. K. Böhm and L. Maicher. Real-Time Generation of
Topic Maps from Speech Streams, 112–124. Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2006.
5. J. A. Brotherton. Enriching Everyday Experiences
through the Automated Capture and Access of Live
Experiences: eClass: Building, Observing and
Understanding the Impact of Capture and Access in an
Educational Domain. PhD thesis, Georgia Tech, 2001.
6. J. M. DiMicco, A. Pandolfo, and W. Bender.
Influencing group participation with a shared display.
In Proc of CSCW, 614–623, 2004. ACM.
7. E. Gabrilovich and S. Markovitch. Computing semantic
relatedness using wikipedia-based explicit semantic
analysis. Proc Artificial Intelligence, 2006.
8. L. He, E. Sanocki, A. Gupta, and J. Grudin.
Auto-summarization of audio-video presentations. In
Proc of Multimedia, 489–498, 1999. ACM.
9. A. Jaimes, K. Omura, T. Nagamine, and K. Hirata.
Memory cues for meeting video retrieval. In Proc of
Continuous archival and retrieval of personal
experiences, 74–85, 2004. ACM.
10. V. Kalnikaité and S. Whittaker. Social summarization:
does social feedback improve access to speech data? In
Proc of CSCW, 9–12, 2008. ACM.
11. J. B. Miller, P. deWinstanley, and P. Carey. Memory for
conversation. Memory, 4(6), 1994.
12. C. Munteanu, R. Baecker, G. Penn, E. Toms, and
D. James. The effect of speech recognition accuracy
rates on the usefulness and usability of webcast
archives. In Proc of CHI, 493–502, 2006. ACM.
13. J. S. Olson, G. M. Olson, M. Storrøsten, and M. Carter.
Groupwork close up: a comparison of the group design
process with and without a simple group editor. ACM
Trans. Inf. Syst., 11(4):321–348, 1993.
14. W. J. Ong. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of
the World. Routledge, 2002.
15. R. Rosenfeld. Two decades of statistical language
modeling: where do we go from here? Proc of IEEE,
88(8), 2000.
16. S. Vemuri, P. DeCamp, W. Bender, and C. Schmandt.
Improving speech playback using time-compression
and speech recognition. In Proc of CHI, 295–302,
2004. ACM.
17. S. Vemuri, C. Schmandt, and W. Bender. iRemember: a
personal, long-term memory prosthesis. In Proc on
CARPE, 65–74, 2006. ACM.
18. L. von Ahn, R. Liu, and M. Blum. Peekaboom: a game
for locating objects in images. In Proc of CHI, 55–64,
2006. ACM.

2352

