PossessedHand: A Hand Gesture Manipulation System
using Electrical Stimuli
Emi Tamaki

Takashi Miyaki

Jun Rekimoto

Interdisciplinary Information
Studies,
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo, Japan

hoimei@acm.org

miyaki@acm.org

rekimoto@acm.org

ABSTRACT
Acquiring knowledge about the timing and speed of hand
gestures is important to learn physical skills, such as playing musical instruments, performing arts, and making handicrafts. However, it is diﬃcult to use devices that dynamically and mechanically control a user’s hand for learning
because such devices are very large, and hence, are unsuitable for daily use. In addition, since groove-type devices
interfere with actions such as playing musical instruments,
performing arts, and making handicrafts, users tend to avoid
wearing these devices. To solve these problems, we propose
PossessedHand, a device with a forearm belt, for controlling
a user’s hand by applying electrical stimulus to the muscles
around the forearm of the user. The dimensions of PossessedHand are 10 × 7.0 × 8.0 cm, and the device is portable
and suited for daily use. The electrical stimuli are generated by an electronic pulse generator and transmitted from
14 electrode pads. Our experiments conﬁrmed that PossessedHand can control the motion of 16 joints in the hand.
We propose an application of this device to help a beginner
learn how to play musical instruments such as the piano and
koto.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
B4.2 [Input/output and data communications]: Input/Output Devices

General Terms
Design

Keywords

Figure 1: Interaction examples of PossessedHand.
(a)A feedback system. (b)A navigation system.

interaction device, output device, wearable, hand gesture,
electrical stimuli

1.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
Augmented Human Conference April 2–3, 2010, Megève, France
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-825-4/10/04 ...$10.00.

INTRODUCTION

Although a number of input systems for hand gestures
have been proposed, very few output systems have been proposed for hand gestures. If a computer system controls a
user’s hand, the system can also be used to provide feedbacks to various interaction systems such as systems for recognizing virtual objects (Fig. 1-a) and navigation (Fig. 1b), assistant systems for playing musical instruments, and
a substitute sensation system for the visually impaired and
hearing impaired. In this paper, we propose PossessedHand,
a device with a forearm belt, for controlling a user’s hand
by applying electrical stimulus to the muscles around the
forearm.

2. PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT
There are four phases for controlling the hand posture. In
this research, we conﬁrm the phase for which PossessedHand
can be used. Thereafter, we propose interaction systems
based on PossessedHand.
• Phase. 1 : Although the user cannot visually conﬁrm the hand motion, he/she feels the motion owing
to his/her somatic sense.
(e.g., Providing feedback for recognizing virtual objects)
• Phase. 2 : User can visually conﬁrm the motion.
(e.g., Learning systems for performing arts)
• Phase. 3 : User’s ﬁngers can be independently controlled to achieve grasping and opening motions.
(e.g.,Assistant systems for musical performances and
sport activities, navigation systems, and sensory substitution systems for the visually impaired and the
hearing impaired)
• Phase. 4 : User’s hand can be controlled to achieve ﬁne
motions such as pinching using the thumb and index
ﬁnger.
(e.g., Learning systems for ﬁnger languages and for
making handicrafts)

Figure 2: Area A:This area is involved in pinching, gripping, and holding motions. Area B: Electric
stimuli are given in this area.

Many devices that directly stimulate a user’s ﬁngers[6]
are proposed. However, users tend to avoid wearing devices
placed on area A, which is shown in Figure 2; this is because
area A is used to touch, hold, and pinch real objects. Area A
interferes with playing musical instruments, performing arts,
and making handicrafts. Groove-type devices that dynamically and mechanically control a user’s hand are available.
Such devices can control a user’s hand for the phases 1-4.
However, such devices cover most of area A. Although a device that can be worn on the forearm is proposed[16], it is
too large for daily use. We propose a small device that can
control a user’s hand and avoid covering area A.

3. RELATED WORK
Electrical muscle stimulation (EMS) has several applications. EMS is widely used in low-frequency therapeutic
equipments and in devices for ergotherapy[9]. Akamatsu et
al. applied EMS for performing arts[18].
Our goal is to control a user’s hand by EMS, which is
similar to functional electrical stimulation (FES)[8], [7],[17],
[14]. In FES, electric currents are used to activate nerves
innervating extremities that are aﬀected by paralysis resulting from stroke or other neurological disorders and injuries
of spinal cord or head; FES can be used to restore functions
in people with disabilities[19].
Watanabe et al. and Kruijﬀ et al. proposed a technique
in which a user’s wrist can be controlled with two degrees
of freedom by stimulating four muscles[14], [5]. They conﬁrmed that they could control wrist motion by electrically
stimulating a muscle because such a stimulation results in
the motion of the tendon connected to the wrist. However,
they did not consider the motion of ﬁnger joints; this motion
is important for controlling the hand posture. Moreover,
they use invasive electrodes embedded under the skin; such
electrodes are not suitable for daily use. For enabling daily
use, we need to use noninvasive electrodes. In addition, we

Figure 3: A prototype of PossessedHand (electronic
pulse generator and electric pads).

need to avoid placing electrodes on hands or ﬁngers because
they are used to hold or touch objects.
In this paper, we propose PossessedHand, a device used
for controlling a user’s hand by applying an electrical stimulus to the muscles around the forearm with noninvasive
electrode pads. Muscles, which are involved in ﬁnger motions, are clustered in the forearm[10]. PossessedHand has
14 electrode pads placed on the forearm to stimulate these
muscles. The tendons that are connected to the muscles
move the ﬁnger joints. There are no precedent researches on
the manner in which hand posture can be controlled by providing only electrical stimulation to the forearm. First, we
conducted an experiment to identify which and how many
ﬁnger joints can be controlled by PossessedHand. In this
paper, we discuss the results on the basis of the phases 1-4
discussed above. Thereafter, we propose interaction systems
that can be realized by using PossessedHand.

Figure 4: Configuration.

4. SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

Figure 5: Operable joints. Arrows and squares indicate independently operable joints. Circles indicate
ganed operable joints.

4.1 Muscles and Stimulations for Making Hand
Postures
We use EMS[2], in which muscle contraction is achieved
by using electric impulses, to control a user’s hand. The impulses are generated by PossessedHand and are transmitted
through electrode pads placed on the skin to the muscles
that are to be stimulated. PossessedHand with the desired
output energy and compact size can be realized by using
EMS[12].
An electrical stimulus of PossessedHand is applied to the
muscles in the forearm of a user because many muscles that
control the ﬁngers and the wrist are located here. We adopt
a forearm belt for PossessedHand. The electrical stimuli are
generated by an electronic pulse generator and transmitted
from 14 electrode pads. The pads are arranged on the upper
and lower parts of the forearm of a user (Fig. 3); eight pads
are needed to stimulate the muscles that are used to bend
the joint in a ﬁnger, and six other pads are needed to stimulate ﬁnger extension and wrist ﬂexion. PossessedHand stimulates seven muscles (superﬁcial ﬂexor muscle, deep ﬂexor
muscle, long ﬂexor muscle of thumb, common digital extensor muscle, ﬂexor carpi radialis muscle, long palmar muscle,
and ﬂexor carpi ulnaris muscle). These muscles are shown
in area B in Figure 3. We can select a channel between a
pad on the upper portion and one on the lower portion of
the forearm. Thus, 7 × 7 channels are available.

4.2 A Prototype of PossessedHand
We built a prototype of PossessedHand using a pulse generator, a channel selector (Photo-MOS Relays Series AQV253),
and 14 electrode pads (Fig. 3). The dimensions of PossessedHand are 10.0 × 7.0 × 8.0 cm, and it is portable and
suited for daily use. Its conﬁguration is shown in Figure 4.
Pulse width is 0.2 ms, and voltage is in the range 17-29 V.

5. EXPERIMENTS
We conﬁrmed that PossessedHand can control the motion
of 16 joints in the hand.
We conducted an experiment to conﬁrm whether the ﬁn-

ger joints can be appropriately moved to achieve desired
hand postures. We selected an anode from the seven electrodes placed on the upper arm, and a ground electrode from
the seven electrodes placed on the hand side. We tested 7by-7 patterns of the electronic paths corresponding to each
of three peak values of the pulse (17 V, 23 V, and 29 V); in
other words, we performed 147 stimulations. We asked the
subjects to eliminate strain in the hand.
In the next section, we introduce 3 interaction systems
of PossessedHand; navigation system, providing feedback
for recognizing virtual objects, assistant system for musical performance. They correspond to phase 1 to 3 of the
hand posture, respectively.
We have conﬁrmed that PossessedHand can control seven
independent and nine linked joints, i.e., a total of 16 joints.
We have also conﬁrmed that a clasped hand can be opened
by stimulating a common digital extensor muscle. Further,
we have conﬁrmed that the users can recognize the motion
of their hands motion even with closed eyes. Figure 5 shows
the results of our experiment. These results suggest that
PossessedHand can control hand postures in phases 1-3 as
discussed above. In the next section, we introduce the three
interaction systems of PossessedHand, namely, the navigation system, feedback system for recognizing virtual objects,
and assistant system for musical performance. These systems correspond to phases 1-3 of the hand posture, respectively.

6.
6.1

INTERACTION SYSTEMS OF POSSESSEDHAND
Navigation System(Using Phases 1, 2, and
3)

We propose a navigation system for PossessedHand (Fig.
1-b). PossessedHand can be used to make hand gestures to
point to user’s destination. This is advantageous because
maps or announcements are not required when using Pos-

Figure 6: manipulator

sessedHand. Watanabe et al. proposed a navigation system
in which galvanic vestibular stimulation (GVS) [15], [20],
[3] is used. Since GVS aﬀects user’s sense of acceleration,
user’s walking direction can be controlled by the proposed
system. However, this system cannot provide detailed information such as direction and distance. We propose a
navigation system that controls wrist ﬂexion and hand posture and provides detailed information about direction and
distance.

6.2 Feedback System for Recognizing Virtual
Objects(Using Phase 1)
PossessedHand can be used as a feedback system that conveys the existence of a 3D virtual object in the real world
(Fig. 1-a). Haptic feedback is necessary for receiving information on virtual objects in augmented reality and mixed
reality spaces. PossessedHand provides haptic feedback by
controlling hand posture as well as visual feedback[4],[11]
obtained using head-mounted displays or 3D displays.

6.3 Assistant System for Musical Performance
(Using Phase 1, 2, and 3)
We propose an application of PossessedHand that helps
a beginner learn how to play the musical instruments such
as the piano and koto. In such musical instruments, subtle
diﬀerences in tones are achieved by ﬁne ﬁnger movements.
The koto is a traditional Japanese stringed musical instrument. A koto player uses three ﬁnger picks (on the thumb,
index ﬁnger, and middle ﬁnger) to pluck the strings. An
appropriate hand posture is important for playing such instruments well (Fig. 6). PossessedHand can assist the beginner to acquire proper hand positions and postures. A
hand-gesture recognition system with a camera[1] can also
be used to identify whether the hand positions and postures
are appropriate for the instrument. PossessedHand can help
the beginner to learn professional techniques, which cannot
be written in scores (Fig. 7). Furthermore, PossessedHand
can help a distant learner learn to move ﬁngers appropriately
when playing musical instruments.

7. DISCUSSION
To extend the use of PossessedHand, we have to consider
reaction rates, accuracy, and muscle fatigue[13] and realize
automatic setup systems to control the voltage and the positions of the electrode pads. It takes 5 min for manually
setting the position of the pads and voltage value. We have

Figure 7: Hand postures for musical performances.
(a)An incorrect posture for playing the piano. (b)A
correct posture for playing the piano. (c)An incorrect posture for playing the koto. (d)A correct posture for playing the koto.

to develop an automatic setup system that is based on neural
network systems, which provide rapid feedback on the position of the pads, voltage value, and joint angles. Thereafter,
the use of PossessedHand can be extended for performing
sports, learning ﬁnger languages, performing arts, and making handicrafts.

8.

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed the use of PossessedHand, a
device used to control hand postures by an electrical stimulation technique. The electrical stimuli are transmitted
from the 14 noninvasive electrode pads placed on the forearm muscles of the user; these stimuli control the motions of
a user’s hand. Our experiments conﬁrmed that PossessedHand can to control the motion of 16 joints in the hand. The
device can control the motion of seven independent joints
and nine joints whose motions are linked with those of other
joints. We conﬁrmed that a clasped hand can be opened by
stimulating the common digital extensor muscle. We also
conﬁrmed that the users can recognize the motion of their
hand even with their eyes closed. On the basis of the results
of the experiments, we proposed three interaction systems,
namely, a navigation system, a feedback system for recognizing virtual objects, and an assistant system for aiding
musical performance.

9.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Ken Iwasaki who have contributed time to this
research.

10.

REFERENCES

[1] T. Emi, M. Takashi, and R. Jun. A robust and
accurate 3d hand posture estimation method for
interactive systems. IPSJ, 51(2):1234–1244, 2010.

[2] H. Hummelsheim, M. Maier-Loth, and C. Eickhof.
The functional value of electrical muscle stimulation
for the rehabilitation of the hand in stroke patients.
Scandinavian journal of rehabilitation medicine,
29(1):3, 1997.
[3] J. Inglis, C. Shupert, F. Hlavacka, and F. Horak.
Eﬀect of galvanic vestibular stimulation on human
postural responses during support surface translations.
Journal of neurophysiology, 73(2):896, 1995.
[4] D. Jack, R. Boian, A. Merians, S. V. Adamovich,
M. Tremaine, M. Recce, G. C. Burdea, and
H. Poizner. A virtual reality-based exercise program
for stroke rehabilitation. In Assets ’00: Proceedings of
the fourth international ACM conference on Assistive
technologies, pages 56–63, New York, NY, USA, 2000.
ACM.
[5] E. Kruijﬀ, D. Schmalstieg, and S. Beckhaus. Using
neuromuscular electrical stimulation for pseudo-haptic
feedback. In VRST ’06: Proceedings of the ACM
symposium on Virtual reality software and technology,
pages 316–319, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
[6] S. Kuroki, H. Kajimoto, H. Nii, N. Kawakami, and
S. Tachi. Proposal for tactile sense presentation that
combines electrical and mechanical stimulus. In WHC
’07: Proceedings of the Second Joint EuroHaptics
Conference and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for
Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, pages
121–126, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE
Computer Society.
[7] M. Poboroniuc and C. Stefan. A method to test
fes-based control strategies for neuroprostheses. In
ICAI’08: Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International
Conference on International Conference on
Automation and Information, pages 344–349, Stevens
Point, Wisconsin, USA, 2008. World Scientiﬁc and
Engineering Academy and Society (WSEAS).
[8] Y. Ryo, S. Yoshihiro, N. Yukio, H. Yasunobu,
Y. Shimada, K. Shigeru, N. Akira, I. Masayoshi, and
H. Nozomu. Analysis of hand movement indubed by
functional electrical stimulation in tetraplegic and
hemiplegic patients. The Japanese Journal of
Rehabilitation Medicine, 21(4):235–242, 1984.
[9] S. S and V. Gerta. Science and practice of strength
training - ems. The Journal of Physiology.
[10] M. Schuenke, U. Schumacher, E. Schulte, and et al.
Atlas of Anatomy: General Anatomy and
Musculoskeletal System.(Prometheus). Georg Thieme
Verlag, 2005.
[11] Y. Shen, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee. Hand
rehabilitation based on augmented reality. In
i-CREATe ’09: Proceedings of the 3rd International
Convention on Rehabilitation Engineering & Assistive
Technology, pages 1–4, New York, NY, USA, 2009.
ACM.
[12] S. Tachi, K. Tanie, and M. Abe. Eﬀects of pulse height
and pulse width on the magnitude sensation of
electrocutaneous stimulus. Japanese journal of medical
electronics and biological engineering, 15(5):315–320,
1977.
[13] S. Takahiro, K. Toshiyuki, and I. Koji. Lower-limb
joint torque and position controls by functional
electrical stimulation (fes). IEICE technical report.

ME and bio cybernetics, 104(757):25–28, 2005.
[14] W. Takashi, I. Kan, K. Kenji, and H. Nozomu. A
method of multichannel pid control of 2-degree of
freedom of wrist joint movements by functional
electrical stimulation. The transactions of the Institute
of Electronics, Information and Communication
Engineers., 85(2):319–328, 2002.
[15] Y. Tomofumi, A. Hideyuki, M. Taro, and W. Junji.
Externalized sense of balance using galvanic vestibular
stimulation. Association for the Scientific Study of
Consciousness 12th Annual Meeting.
[16] D. Tsetserukou, K. Sato, A. Neviarouskaya,
N. Kawakami, and S. Tachi. Flextorque: innovative
haptic interface for realistic physical interaction in
virtual reality. In SIGGRAPH ASIA ’09: ACM
SIGGRAPH ASIA 2009 Art Gallery & Emerging
Technologies: Adaptation, pages 69–69, New York,
NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[17] S. H. Woo, J. Y. Jang, E. S. Jung, J. H. Lee, Y. K.
Moon, T. W. Kim, C. H. Won, H. C. Choi, and J. H.
Cho. Electrical stimuli capsule for control moving
direction at the small intestine. In BioMed’06:
Proceedings of the 24th IASTED international
conference on Biomedical engineering, pages 311–316,
Anaheim, CA, USA, 2006. ACTA Press.
[18] N. Yoichi, A. Masayuki, and T. Masaki. Development
of bio-feedback system and applications for musical
performances. IPSJ SIG Notes, 2002(40):27–32, 2002.
[19] D. Zhang, T. H. Guan, F. Widjaja, and W. T. Ang.
Functional electrical stimulation in rehabilitation
engineering: a survey. In i-CREATe ’07: Proceedings
of the 1st international convention on Rehabilitation
engineering &#38; assistive technology, pages
221–226, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[20] R. Zink, S. Steddin, A. Weiss, T. Brandt, and
M. Dieterich. Galvanic vestibular stimulation in
humans: eﬀects on otolith function in roll.
Neuroscience letters, 232(3):171–174, 1997.

