ScalableBody : A Telepresence Robot Supporting Socially
Acceptable Interactions and Human Augmentation through
Vertical Actuation
Akira Matsuda
The University of Tokyo
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
akira.matsuda.ut@gmail.com

Jun Rekimoto
The University of Tokyo, Sony CSL
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
rekimoto@acm.org

Figure 1. ScalableBody: A Telepresence robot with a vertical actuation mechanism enables to communicate similar to face-to-face communication. (a)
The remote user can make eye-contact even though they’re using telepresence robot. (b) The remote user can connect the robot to look around the place
with 360-degree view. (c) Adjusting its height according to communication contexts.

ABSTRACT

ACM Classification Keywords

Most telepresence robots have a fixed-size body, and are unable to change the camera or display position. Therefore, although making eye contact is important in human expression,
current fixed-size telepresence robots fail to achieve this.

H.5.3. Group and Organization Interfaces: Computersupported cooperative work; H.4.3. Communication Applications: Computer conferencing, teleconferencing, and videoconferencing

We propose a novel telepresence robot called ScalableBody,
which enables users to make eye contact during conversations
by changing its height. ScalableBody extends its body to
modify the position of its camera or display. This approach
provides eye contacts in remote conversations, thus creating
almost same situation when the remote and local users make
conversation like a real meeting. As for the remote users, this
approach also enables them to experience having a conversation from different heights, such as being a giant or a dwarf.
This technique extends the possibilities of remote communication by telepresence robots.
Author Keywords

Telepresence robot; surrogate robot; remote communication;
eye-contact; human augmentation
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

INTRODUCTION

Non-verbal communication is an important component of natural communication. An eye contact is also regarded as an
important communication cue that may change impressions
during a conversation. These studies [2, 5] suggest the height
of a robot is an important social cue for having communication. Thus, it is important to ensure eye contact to enable rich
communication.
However, with typical telepresence robots, a remote userâĂŹs
expressions are not well conveyed for the following reasons.
First, such a robot does not reflect the remote userâĂŹs actual
height because a typical telepresence robot cannot change
its height. Second, it is also difficult to make eye contact in
different conversation contexts. For example, when a person
is sitting, it is natural for the other party to also sit down to
join a conversation, to enable equal-level eye contact.
To deal with these problems, we designed and implemented
a telepresence robot called ScalableBody with the ability to
change its height dynamically and produce social equality between remote and local users through eye contact (Figure 1).
It is also possible to adjust its height according to communication contexts such as standing or sitting. Furthermore, the
robot has a 360-degree camera so the remote user can look
around the place easily without any extra mechanism like a

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985718

103

motor actuation. Further still, by augmenting their eye position, the remote user can see the world from a giantâĂŹs or a
dwarfâĂŹs point of view.
SCALABLEBODY

to understanding a local environment. So we added the 360degree camera and its wide omnidirectional view allows the
remote user to overlook the local environment easily (Figure 1b). The camera view is live streamed to the remote user and
the user can change the angle at will.
DISCUSSION

Changing the height of the robot enables the following applications.
Collaboration work

It helps in collaboration work, such as a factory inspection. A
highly located pipe, unreachable for inspection by the local
user, could still be inspected by the remote user.
Figure 2. A detail of our telepresence robot, ScalableBody. (a) The vertical actuation allows to change the height dynamically. (b) Changing the
height of body, it enables to reflect the same height of remote user.

Designing society from another persons view

We use iron reel to implement the vertical actuation mechanism. This is inspired by the dynamic structure of Kinereels,
which is developed by Takei et al. [6]. This technique enables
high extended ratio with small size and light weight, so it is
easy to adopt to robot with limited payload and size. Alternative mechanisms, like leadscrews, a rack-and-pinion and
scissor lifts, needs a lot of space. This mechanism enables the
robot to change its height within a greater range while keeping
a small size, so as to easily move around indoors. Our robot
can change height from 65cm to 200cm (Figure 2-a), the range
is 135cm, while for a conventional telepresence robot, such as
Double [1], the range is just 30cm (120cm to 150cm).
The robot has an iron reel sitting on an omniwheel robot base,
a 360-degree camera and a display (Figure 2-b). The camera
and display are lifted by the vertical actuation mechanism. To
push up or pull down the iron reel, we use four motors and one
motor driver. For the base of the robot, we use the omni-wheel
robot 1 . The omni-wheel robot and motor driver are operated
by Arduino Uno. The robot is controlled wirelessly by a PC
on the same network via the UDP protocol. We describe the
benefit of the vertical actuation and using a 360-degree camera
in the following sections.

This system allows the remote user to see the world from
different height. A child view, might enable finding dangerous
furniture in a house or a bad sight location in a residential
areas.
Sport Coaching

The vertical actuation removes a gap of physique in sport
coaching. A coach can see the view of a athlete and teach
more flexibly in sports that require accurate aiming dependant
on body height, like golf, baseball or archery.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this study, we propose a novel telepresence robot using
vertical actuation. It allows for matching the eye-level between remote and local users. We also describe a set of usage
scenarios which benefit from vertical actuation.
Our system has the following limitations. First, the display
sways when the body is extended since its mounted on the top
of the robot. We noticed that the swaying pattern, and natural frequency is different depending on the length. This may
cause motion sickness, but some types of image stabilization
technologies can resolve this issue. Second, because of weight
limitations there is a performance limit of the camera and/or
display. When the robot has too large a display or camera, the
vertical actuation mechanism breaks when the robot is changing its height or moving. We will overcome these limitations
in the next version.

Eye-level matching with vertical actuation

With vertical actuation, changing the height provides the following benefits. First, the robot can adapt its height to the
context, like standing up or sitting down (Figure 1-c). It can
make eye contact and conversation which is similar to face-toface communication. Second, the user can extend the body in
accordance with the users height. This represents the actual
height of a remote user. Third, users can have an extraordinary
experience (Figure 1-b) such as taking the viewpoint of a giant
or a dwarf by stretching the robot to very high or very low
height. Namely, the vertical actuation also enables human
augmentation.
Free viewpoint through 360-degree camera view

Remote conversation is common in collaboration work, and
previous studies [3, 4] shows that 360-camera views are useful
1 http://www.nexusrobot.com/product.php?id_product=87

REFERENCES

1. Double Robotics - Blended Learning / Hybrid Classroom.
http://www.doublerobotics.com/education/. (????).
2. M. Desai, K. M. Tsui, H. A. Yanco, and C. Uhlik. 2011.
Essential features of telepresence robots. In 2011 IEEE
Conference on Technologies for Practical Robot
Applications. 15–20. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TEPRA.2011.5753474

3. Shunichi Kasahara and Jun Rekimoto. 2015. JackIn Head:
Immersive Visual Telepresence System with
Omnidirectional Wearable Camera for Remote
Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology
(VRST ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 217–225. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2821592.2821608

104

4. Daniel A. Lazewatsky and William D. Smart. 2011. A
Panorama Interface for Telepresence Robots. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Human-robot Interaction (HRI ’11). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 177–178. DOI:

Conference on Human-robot Interaction (HRI ’13). IEEE
Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 1–8.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2447556.2447558

6. Shohei Takei, Makoto Iida, and Takeshi Naemura. 2011.
KineReels: Extension Actuators for Dynamic 3D Shape.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Posters (SIGGRAPH ’11).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 84, 1 pages. DOI:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1957656.1957719

5. Irene Rae, Leila Takayama, and Bilge Mutlu. 2013. The
Influence of Height in Robot-mediated Communication.
In Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE International

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2037715.2037810

105

