Virtual Sweet: Simulating Sweet Sensation Using Thermal
Stimulation on the Tip of the Tongue
Nimesha Ranasinghe
Keio-NUS CUTE Center,
Interactive and Digital Media Institute,
National University of Singapore
nimesha@nus.edu.sg

Ellen Yi-Luen Do
Keio-NUS CUTE Center,
Interactive and Digital Media Institute,
National University of Singapore
ellendo@nus.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

Being a pleasurable sensation, sweetness is recognized as the
most preferred sensation among the five primary taste sensations. In this paper, we present a novel method to virtually
simulate the sensation of sweetness by applying thermal stimulation to the tip of the human tongue. To digitally simulate
the sensation of sweetness, the system delivers rapid heating
and cooling stimuli to the tongue via a 2x2 grid of Peltier
elements. To achieve distinct, controlled, and synchronized
temperature variations in the stimuli, a control module is used
to regulate each of the Peltier elements. Results from our preliminary experiments suggest that the participants were able to
perceive mild sweetness on the tip of their tongue while using
the proposed system.
Figure 1. A participant places the tip of the tongue in the middle portion
of the Peltier grid to simulate virtual sweetness.

CCS Concepts

•Human-centered computing → Interaction paradigms;
Mixed / augmented reality; Interaction devices;
Author Keywords

Thermal taste; virtual sweet; sweet; virtual reality;
multimodal interaction
INTRODUCTION

Sweetness, one of the five basic taste sensations, is typically
produced by sugar dissolving on the tongue. However, excess
consumption of sugar and sugar-based foods or beverages
can have a detrimental effect on a human’s health and lead to
major health concerns, including obesity and diabetes [2]. By
virtually simulating the sensation of sweetness, we will be able
to introduce the sensation as a digitally controllable media
and augment real-world flavors by virtually overlaying the
simulated sweetness while users consume food and beverages.
For example, having a similar system embedded on a personal
glass or mug will enable a user to consume beverages with
a lowered sugar content whilst maintaining the same sweet
palatability of similar products with higher sugar content.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985729

As a solution, we have developed a digital instrument to simulate sweetness on the tongue. The proposed method is built
on existing research that has highlighted the possibility of
generating taste sensations by heating and cooling the human
tongue [1, 3, 4]. Prior work has shown that controlled thermal
stimulation not only simulates sweetness, but also enhances
the perception of sweetness on the tongue due to the activation
of TRPM5 ion channels, which have a key role in triggering
the human perception of sweetness [1, 4]. This phenomenon
will enable consumption of reduced sugar food and beverages
while maintaining their palatability. Ranasinghe et al. have
developed a control system to study the effects of thermal stimulation on the tongue with a single Peltier element. They have
recorded evidence of simulated sour, minty, spicy, and sweet
sensations when the temperature of applied thermal stimuli is
changed during continuous heating and cooling [3].
The work presented in this paper explores the effects and
perceptions of synchronous and simultaneous thermal stimuli
on the tongue with a 2x2 grid of Peltier elements. Thus, the
novelty of this work is the simultaneous utilization of two
different thermal stimuli (synchronized heating and cooling)
on the tongue. Figure 1 shows a participant interacting with
the system by placing the tip of the tongue on the 2x2 grid
Peltier elements.
METHOD

The virtual sweet instrument has three main submodules for
power, control, and the output of stimuli. A 9V battery is used

127

detectable levels. Feedback also highlighted that some participants did not consistently experience singularly distinctive
taste sensations but, instead, perceived mixtures of sensations
such as sweet and minty. These results indicate the need for
further sets of controlled experiments. We also observed several limitations: 1) manually aligning the placement of the
tongue in the middle of the Peltier grid, 2) absorption of heat
by the human tongue during the stimulation, which leads to
poor performance, and 3) salivation due to the tongue is in
contact with the instrument out of the mouth for an extended
period. In addition to these points, due to the subjective nature
of the sense of taste and sensory adaptation to stimuli, the presence of different sensory phenomena must be considered and
tackled through the individual calibration of the instrument for
every single user.
Figure 2. Different components of the Virtual Sweet instrument.

DEMO EXPERIENCE

as the power source and a control system has been developed
to manage the thermal stimuli. A dual channel DC motor
driver, based on full H-bridge configuration, is used to control
the flow of current through the Peltier elements. The technique
of Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM) is then used to control the
time required to achieve a distinct temperature change. By
utilizing this method, the instrument is calibrated to achieve a
5◦ C degree of change within approximately 4 seconds.
To stimulate the tip of the tongue, a 2x2 grid of Peltier elements, each individually mounted on a heatsink, is used to
achieve efficient and accurate temperature control. The dimensions of each Peltier element are 6mm x 6mm. This setup
is shown in Figure 2, and as labeled on the Peltier elements,
simultaneous thermal stimuli are applied as 1) heating, 2) cooling, 3) heating, and 4) cooling on different Peltier elements.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A preliminary experiment has been conducted with 15 participants (8 males and 7 females with an average age of 24) to
explore the effectiveness of this approach, with a focus on the
use of simultaneous thermal stimuli. The experiments were
performed in a dark and quiet room that had a temperature that
was constantly maintained at 20◦ C. The thermal stimuli are
controlled within 20◦ C - 35◦ C and continuously fluctuate between these minimum and maximum boundaries. Participants
were asked to place the tip of their tongue in the middle portion
of the Peltier grid. Each participant was provided with three
sessions and each session had three cycles of 20◦ C-35◦ C-20◦ C
and 35◦ C-20◦ C-35◦ C stimuli. In between each session, participants were given a 5 minutes resting period; also providing
time to correctly reset the temperature of the Peltier elements
and the control system in order to provide accurate control of
thermal stimuli. To obtain feedback after each session, participants were asked to report their perceived level of sweetness
intensity on a 5-point rating-scale of: barely detectable, mild,
medium, strong, and very strong. Only the feedback after the
final session for each participant was recorded as their final
perception.
Preliminary results indicate that, although some of the participants perceive the sweet sensation (53% - 8 out of 15), the
intensity of the simulated sweetness was only at mild or barely

128

During the interactive demonstration, users will experience the
aforementioned virtual simulation of the sensation of sweetness on the tongue. Also, they may select different combinations of thermal stimuli, for example, contrasting thermal
stimuli vs. similar stimuli (synchronized heating and cooling
vs. separated heating and/or cooling) and different speeds of
heating and cooling. With regards to hygiene considerations
within the demonstration, we will use two different modules
and clean the Peltier elements using alcohol swabs and deionizedăwater before each new trial.
CONCLUSION

In summary, this work demonstrates a novel instrumentation
for providing controllable virtual sweet sensations that may
be incorporated into interactive computer systems. Here, thermal stimulation is used to simulate sweetness, and employs
synchronous heating and cooling of the tongue, via a 2x2 grid
of Peltier elements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its International
Research Centres in Singapore Funding Initiative.
REFERENCES

1. A. Cruz and B.G. Green. 2000. Thermal stimulation of
taste. Nature 403, 6772 (2000), 889–892.
2. Robert H Lustig, Laura A Schmidt, and Claire D Brindis.
2012. Public health: the toxic truth about sugar. Nature
482, 7383 (2012), 27–29.
3. Nimesha Ranasinghe, Ryohei Nakatsu, Hideaki Nii, and
Ponnampalam Gopalakrishnakone. 2012. Tongue
mounted interface for digitally actuating the sense of
taste. In 2012 16th International Symposium on Wearable
Computers. IEEE, 80–87.
4. K. Talavera, K. Yasumatsu, T. Voets, G. Droogmans, N.
Shigemura, Y. Ninomiya, R.F. Margolskee, and B. Nilius.
2005. Heat activation of TRPM5 underlies thermal
sensitivity of sweet taste. Nature 438, 7070 (2005),
1022–1025.

