UnlimitedHand: Input and Output Hand Gestures with Less
Calibration Time
Emi Tamaki
Waseda University, JST
PRESTO (Sakigake), H2L, Inc.
Tokyo, JAPAN.
hoimei@acm.org

Terence Chan
Researcher, H2L, Inc.
Tokyo, JAPAN.
terence@h2l.jp

Ken Iwasaki
CEO, H2L, Inc.
Tokyo, JAPAN.
iwkn@acm.org / ken@h2l.jp

ABSTRACT

Numerous devices that either track hand gestures or provide
haptic feedback have been developed with the aim of
manipulating objects within Virtual Reality(VR) and
Augmented Reality(AR) environments. However, these
devices implement lengthy calibration processes to ease out
individual differences.
In this research, a wearable device that simultaneously
recognizes hand gestures and outputs haptic feedback:
UnlimitedHand is suggested. Photo-reflectors are placed
over specific muscle groups on the forearm to read in hand
gestures. For output, electrodes are placed over the same
muscles to control the user's hand movements. Both sensors
and electrodes target main muscle groups responsible for
moving the hand. Since the positions of these muscle groups
are common between humans, UnlimitedHand is able to
reduce the time spent on performing calibration.

Figure 1. UnlimitedHand: Input and Output System

ACM Classification Keywords

Pursuits have largely focused on the visual and auditory
faculties. However, we hope to build upon a strand of
research focused on the hand, an aspect of the human body
that allows for rich haptic experiences[1]. Wearable systems
tracking hand movements require intricate sensing
mechanisms that resolve physical individual differences.
Lengthy calibration processes are often implemented to
ensure consistency amongst users.

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):

RELATED WORK

INTRODUCTION

Various calibration processes have been applied by systems
that input and output hand gestures.

Author Keywords

Haptic sensation; Photo-reflector array; EMS(Electric
Muscle Stimulation); FES(Functional Electric Stimulation);
Electric Stimulation; Hand Gesture; AR(Augmented
Reality); VR(Virtual Reality)

Sensations produced by the human body are formed through
various closed loop systems that require both an input and an
output. The agenda for VR and AR research have been to
simultaneously provide the two, in order to simulate
sensations recognizable by the human sensory system.

Lopes et. al suggested a way to perceive impact in VR with
EMS[2]. The EMS calibration procedure took about 4
minutes, during which contraction to the biceps was repeated
ten times. Because this system has no sensors, users have to
check the relation between the EMS and hand motions by
themselves.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985743

PossessedHand is a EMS stimulation kit that uses multiple
electrodes for calibration[3]. PossessedHand uses 14 channel
electrodes to decrease calibration time. By applying EMS to
each electrode, PossessedHand eventually identifies the
points that delivers haptic feedback. Because it can be worn
at any angle, the system does not take into account of the
user’s muscle size. The device had to match electrodes to

163

wings around the circumference of the forearm), electrodes
naturally settle on targeted muscle groups.

corresponding muscle groups. The EMS calibration
procedure took more than 5 minutes.
Myo, a gesture recognition armband, has 8ch electrodes that
detect muscle motions via EMG to obtain finger
movements[4]. Because it can be worn at any angle, this
system too does not take a user's muscle size into account.
The device had to match electrodes to corresponding muscle
groups. The calibration procedure took more than 4 minutes.
The three systems mentioned have in common that they are
worn around the user's forearm to either sense or actuate on
targeted muscles responsible for creating hand gestures.
Because of this they share the same obstacle of having to
reconfigure hardware or software settings when put to use
with forearms of differing sizes.

Figure 2. Placement of photo-reflectors and electrodes

With UnlimitedHand, we contribute by providing a solution
that will encourage further research done on haptic feedback
by rendering FES based experiments less cumbersome to
execute and replicate, while retaining versatile sensing and
actuation functionalities.
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

In this report, a wearable device named “UnlimitedHand”
that allows users to interact with virtual dimensions through
their hands is described. The device simultaneously tracks
hand movements while passing electrical current onto the
user's forearm muscles to generate haptic feedback. When
worn, both sensors and actuators rest naturally on targeted
main muscles groups of the forearm. They are responsible
for triggering hand movements. Since the positions of main
muscle groups are common amongst humans, the time
needed for calibration is reduced.
Input Interface

To facilitate the making of various hand gestures, muscles
and tendons located at the forearm undergoes a series of
minute flexes. By tracking these displacements with an 8
channel photo-reflector array, the device is able to deduce
wrist and finger movements of the wearer.

Figure 3. Sensors(IR) and Electrodes(V and GND)
situated over main muscle groups(M)
CALIBRATION PROCESS

We prepared tests that measured the time taken for
UnlimitedHand to calibrate itself to a user's forearm. In our
test we specified 4 types of hand gestures to be tracked. It
took 10 seconds to complete the calibration, during which
sensor and stimulation levels are read. The input system
parses the data to identify gestures created by the user.
During calibration, the output system applies stimulation to
the user in 6 ascending levels to find optimum stimulation
levels. The output system then controls the 4 type gestures.
We worked out averages and standard deviations from sensor
values to deduce the movement of individual muscles.

Output Interface

The 8 channel electrodes built into the device functions to
produce haptic feedback(kinesthetic) through Electric
Muscle Stimulation(EMS). This is done by passing current
between electrodes positioned on the wearer’s forearm. As a
result, targeted sets of muscles contract to trigger involuntary
movement of the hand.
Tackling Individual Differences

Human forearms naturally come in different sizes and builds.
UnlimitedHand's arrangement of sensors and electrodes
makes it easier to target stimulation points.

FUTURE WORK

Both electrodes and photo-reflectors are arranged on a Vshaped resin sheet. Electrodes are distributed into three
portions on the device, left side, right side and the center.
Rectangular electrodes are inclined at 32 degrees to the
circumferential direction of the forearm. With this design,
whenever the device is worn (by wrapping the left and right

The goal of this research project is to allow for dexterous
interactions hand gestures to be made remotely with less
calibration. With the combination of muscle motion sensors
and EMS, UnlimitedHand will control the joint angles.
Accuracy levels will be measured for this research.

164

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is conducted under the budget of JST PRESTO
(Sakigake). We thank Ayumi Hukuchi, Ririko Motoyama,
Yukako Miyanishi, Yuki Tada and Misaki Inaoka for their
support on this research.

3.

Tamaki, E., Miyaki, T., and Rekimoto, J.
PossessedHand. In Proceedings of the 2011 annual
conference on Human factors in computing
systems - CHI ’11, ACM Press (New York, New
York, USA, May 2011), 543.

4.

Tamaki, E., Miyaki, T., and Rekimoto, J.
PossessedHand. In Proceedings of the 2011 annual
conference on Human factors in computing
systems - CHI ’11, ACM Press (New York, New
York, USA, May 2011), 543.

5.

Myo - Gesture control armband by Thalmic Labs.
Retrieved January 13, 2016 from
https://www.myo.com

REFERENCES

1.

2.

Ramsamy, P., Haffegee, A., Jamieson, R., and
Alexandrov, V. Using haptics to improve
immersion in virtual environments. Proc. ICCS'06,
603–609.
Lopes, P., Ion, A., & Baudisch, P. (2015,
November). Impacto: Simulating Physical Impact
by Combining Tactile Stimulation with Electrical
Muscle Stimulation. In Proceedings of the 28th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software & Technology (pp. 11-19). ACM.

165

