Orchestrated Informal Care Coordination:
Designing a connected network of tools in support of
collective care activities for informal caregivers
Kyungmin Youn
Google Inc.
Mountain View, CA, USA
kyungminyoun@google.com
ABSTRACT

and promote senior’s independent living through
monitoring and sensing data of residents. However, despite
the fact that family caregivers play a significant role in
managing seniors’ overall health care [1], little has been
focused on how family caregivers can benefit from these
technologies when it comes to care coordination for their
loved ones in their own homes.

Often, family caregivers experience difficulties in
coordinating older adults’ health care because it requires not
only a lot of time but also a diverse set of responsibilities to
coordinate care for their loved ones. While many can
reduce their individual burden by sharing care tasks with
other family members, there are still many challenges to
overcome in maintaining the quality of care when they
work together. As they increase their informal care network,
it becomes more difficult for them to stay informed and
coordinated. Coordination breakdowns caused by having
multiple caregivers who are cooperating to care for the
same care recipient result in reduced quality of care. I
explored opportunities for “Internet of Things (IoT)”
technologies to help informal caregivers better coordinate
and communicate care with each other for their loved ones.
Based on identified design opportunities, I propose the
concept of CareBot, a smart home platform consisting of
interactive tools in support of collective care activities of
family caregivers.

I investigated opportunities for IoT technologies to help
informal caregivers better coordinate and communicate care
with each other for their loved ones. Using a user-centered
design approach, I explored various facets that make up the
overall experiences of family caregivers who are involved
in in-home care coordination. My design process included:
• Conducting in-depth interviews with 16 people including
family caregivers, care recipients, and professional care
coordinators
• Developing design concepts that address findings
extracted from the exploratory research
• Speed dating as a means to validate user needs, obtain
feedback and gain perspective on the concepts

Author Keywords

Caregiving; Caregiver; Connected Home; Internet of
Things; Field Study; Qualitative Methods.

• Physical form studies with various material forms and
interactions as a way of further exploring design ideas.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
User-centered design

The findings of the qualitative study have revealed three
main opportunities in which IoT can play a significant role
for informal caregivers’ collective care coordination: (i)
facilitating care works by reminding caregivers of tasks that
need to be done and providing instructions on how to
accomplish it, (ii) having crucial information accessible to
everyone in the network of informal caregivers to stay
organized and coordinated, and (iii) keeping everyone
engaged and connected to avoid breakdown caused by poor
communication and lack of information. Based on
identified design opportunities, I suggest the concept of
CareBot, a smart home platform consisting of interactive
tools that help family caregivers better coordinate and
communicate care with each other for their loved ones.

INTRODUCTION

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, about 1 in 5 U.S.
residents are projected to be aged 65 and over by 2030 [4].
Already more than 65 million Americans are informal
caregivers providing care for an ill, disabled or aged family
member [3]. Due to the continuous growth in the elderly
population and the fact that most Americans would rather
keep living in their homes than move to care facilities as
they get older [2], the number of informal caregivers and
the importance of in-home care will continually increase.
In the face of this trend, research has been conducted from
both health informatics and HCI communities on how smart
home and IoT technologies can support home health care

CONCEPT OVERVIEW

CareBot is designed to provide a new way of engaging in
care and preventing potential breakdowns caused by having
multiple caregivers who work together. Main features of the
concept of CareBot are three fold:

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984752

167

1. Remind: It triggers reminders to prompt caregivers to
complete care activities that haven’t been done on time.
It aims to reduce the chances of forgetting and
overlapping care works such as taking medication,
drinking water, and simple exercise.
2. Capture: It helps caregivers capture the care activities
that should be coordinated at the point of action. It
provides a way to document and annotate care activities
that have or haven’t been done to give contextual
information to other caregivers.
3. Connect: It keeps all family caregivers connected to
crucial information of care as well as to each other. It
makes it easier for caregivers to stay in the loop and
organize support together. It also gives caregivers the
opportunity to volunteer and take over care tasks.
!
Figure 2. Physical tool of CareBot
FUTURE WORK

The caregiver role involves a wide variety of types of care,
and caregivers and care recipients’ social dynamics are
incredibly diverse. Although I tried to ensure a various
spectrum of contexts of care, this research is still limited to
certain types of contexts of care. Therefore, further research
should be conducted to verify and extend the resulting
design to different disease and circumstances.

To concretize these features of CareBot, its design should
leverage the benefit of smart home and IoT technologies.

The concept of CareBot also requires a more robust system
around it to better support family caregivers and care
recipients. In the future, it can connect with a more diverse
set of smart devices, such as a home medical kit, fitness kit,
thermostat, and etc. The service side should be designed
and verified as well in a holistic way in order to make
CareBot more useful for family caregivers as a smart home
platform. For example, family caregivers might want to
seamlessly connect the information and data of their care
activities that they gathered from CareBot to professional
medical service providers for a better medical experience.
Great opportunities exist for the bridge between informal
care coordination and formal medical care, so further work
is needed to explore these opportunities.

!
Figure 1. System map of CareBot.
First, these technologies allow caregivers to keep track of
important care information by monitoring data of residents.
CareBot should communicate with a range of smart objects
and devices to get necessary information of care such as a
schedule for must-do activities and real-time data of
caregivers and care recipients’ activities. Second, A
connected network of physical objects would engage
caregivers as more active and better-informed participants of
care. CareBot has a physical tool which is directly situated in
the real context of care to allow it to better trigger reminders
and capture the care work at the point of action.

REFERENCES

1.Giovannetti, E. R., Wolff, J. L., Xue, Q. L., Weiss, C. O.,
Leff, B., Boult, C., ... & Boyd, C. M. (2012). Difficulty
assisting with health care tasks among caregivers of
multimorbid older adults. Journal of general internal
medicine, 27(1), 37-44.
2.Mathew Greenwald & Associates, Inc. These Four Walls:
Americans 45+ Talk About Home and Community, May
2003. Retrieved March 12, 2016, from AARP
Research: http://www.aarp.org/home-garden/livablecommunities/info-2003/four_walls.html.
3.National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP Public Policy
Institute. Caregiving in the U.S., June 2015. Retrieved
March 15, 2016, from AARP Research: http://
www.aarp.org/ppi/info-2015/caregiving-in-the-unitedstates-2015.html.
4.Ortman, J.M., Velkoff, V.A. and Hogan, H. An Aging
Nation: The Older Population in the United
States, P25-1140 (2014).

The physical tool of CareBot breaks mainly into two parts:
the Bot and an e-ink display. The Bot is the part that signals
users to take actions and that users actually interact with to
get information. It is packed with multiple sensors and
components including LED display, motion detector,
Bluetooth, and etc. The e-ink display is the part that displays
details of information that the Bot provides. The Bot lights up
when there’s an action to take for the care recipient. Each
side of the Bot has different types of information that
caregivers need to know and lights up when there’s specific
information to display. When users turn the Bot, the e-ink
display presents details of information on the surface which
correspond to the right side of the Bot.

168

