Initial Trials of ofxEpilog: From Real Time Operation to
Dynamic Focus of Epilog Laser Cutter
Mitsuhito Ando
YCAM
ando@ycam.jp

Chisaki Murakami
YCAM
chiichan@ycam.jp

Takayuki Ito
YCAM
taka@ycam.jp

Kazuhiro Jo
YCAM / Faculty of
Design, Kyushu
University
jo@ycam.jp

ABSTRACT

BACKGROUND

This paper describes ofxEpilog which enable people to
control a laser cutter of Epilog in real time. ofxEpilog is an
addon of openFrameworks, an open source C++ toolkit for
creative coding. With the addon, people could directly send
their image object to a laser cutter through Ethernet. By
alternating the generation and transmission of the command
of cutting, the addon could sequentially control a laser
cutter in real time. This paper introduces our initial trials of
ofxEpilog with a real time operation (A), dynamic focus (zaxis) control with a given 3D object (B), and a scanned 3D
object (C). Technical limitations and our upcoming
challenges are also discussed.

The roots of the addon is cups-epilog.c, a cups driver for
Epilog
laser
engraver
by
AS220
(http://mtm.cba.mit.edu/cups/cups-epilog/src/cupsepilog.c). With the driver, people could control the laser
cutter through a network with a diverse range of systems
such as Mac, Linux, instead of a proprietary driver just for
windows. Trammell Hudson updated the driver into a
command line tool (https://trmm.net/Epilog_driver) that
translates the PDF files into commands for the laser cutter.
The both software (and the proprietary driver, of course)
generate commands based on Hewlett-Packard Graphics
Language (HP-GL) [4] to control the laser cutter.

Author Keywords

For example, a command of PD (Pen Down) starts an
emission of laser till it receives PU (Pen Up) command. YP,
ZS, and XR command controls the power, speed, and
frequency of laser, and WD controld the height of a table of
a laser cutter (Table.1).

Laser cutter; Personal Fabrication; Open Source Toolkit
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

HPGL commands

Laser cutter is one of a core tools in personal fabrication
[3]. In accordance with the rapid growth of the community,
several systems explore the use of laser cutter in their
unique ways beyond the standard applications (i.e. Adobe
Illustrator, Corel Draw, Inkscape) and the proprietary
drivers [5].
In this paper, we go step further the
exploration with the flexibility of creative coding in which
people try to produce something by programming at the
intersection of art, media and technology. Specifically, we
show our trials of
ofxEpilog [1], an addon of
openFrameworks (http://www.openframeworks.cc/), which
enable people to control a laser cutter of Epilog
(https://www.epiloglaser.com) in real time.

PU [x, y]

Function
Move laser cutter head with x-y
coordinates

PD [x, y]

Emit and move laser cutter head
with x-y coordinates

YP [power]

Set the power of vector process

ZS [speed]

Set the speed of vector process

XR [frequency]

Set the frequency of vector
process

WD [z offset]

Set the height of table

Table 1. Examples of HPGL commands

By standing on the shoulders of the precursors, we have
developed our software from scratch as an addon (i.e.
external library) of openFrameworks, an open source C++
toolkit for creative coding. Because of the capability of
openFrameworks
for
computational
graphical
programming, people could algorithmically generate a
diverse range of vector graphics and send the data directly
into the laser cutter.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
/UIST'16 Adjunct/, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984756

ofxEpilog

ofxEpilog is an addon of openFrameworks that directly
control a laser cutter of Epilog (e.g. Zing, Mini, Fusion).

175

With the addon, the coder could directly send their image
object such as ofPolyline (i.e. multiple points vector data)
or ofImage (i.e. pixel data) within openFrameworks through
Ethernet. The x-y position and the parameter of power,
speed, and frequency of a laser, as well as the height of a
table (i.e. z-axis) could be controlled in the cutting process
instead of the pre-configured setting of the proprietary
driver. By alternating the generation and transmission of the
command of cutting, the addon could sequentially control a
laser cutter in real time.

needs to have an angle of inclination less than 30 degrees
while keeping the focal length.

INITIAL TRIALS
A. Real time operation

Previously, most of the laser cutter works with a preconfigured set of data in series. However, the latest version
of Epilog laser cutter (i.e. Fusion) features a real time
operation of its height of a table, position, and fire with its
handy joystick. ofxEpilog expands the possibilities of real
time operation by enabling the coder to connect a diverse
range of input devices such as a mouse, pen, and eyetracking with the parameters.

Fig 2. Processing 3D scanned object with 3D curves.

B. A dynamic focus (z-axis) with a structured 3D object

ofxEpilog enables to control the focus (z-axis) of a laser
cutter during its operation. Therefore, when we have
differences in height in a material for cutting, we could
dynamically change the focus with its contour instead of
dividing the data into different layers with the height with
the proprietary driver. According to a given structured 3D
object with a free-form surface, the addon could engrave
3D curves to the 3D object while keeping the focus (z-axis)
by changing table height (Fig.1).

Fig 3. A physical collision in a certain tool path.
CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have explained our initial three trials of
ofxEpilog, an addon for openFrameworks. Since the code is
open to the public as our precursors (https://github.com/
YCAMInterlab/ofxEpilog), we anticipate to have successors to expand the use of our addon in a hackable manner [2].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 15K12842.
REFERENCES

1.

Ando, M., Suganuma, K., Ito, T., Jo, K., ofxEpilog: An
openFrameworks addon for controlling an Epilog laser
cutter, Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on
Digital Fabrication 2016 Tokyo, March 3-5, pp.64-67.

2.

Davison, Andrew. Kinect Open Source Programming
Secrets: Hacking the Kinect with OpenNI, NITE, and
Java, McGraw Hill Professional, 2012.

3.

Gershenfeld, Neil. Fab: the coming revolution on your
desktop--from personal computers to personal
fabrication. Basic Books, 2008.

4.

Hewlett-Packard, The HP-GL/2 and HP RTL
Reference Guide: A Handbook for Program
Developers
(3rd
Edition),
Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1997.

5.

Mueller, Stefanie, and Patrick Baudisch. "Laser cutters:
a new class of 2D output devices." interactions 22.5
(2015): 72-74.

Fig 1. Processing pre structured 3D object with 3D curves.
C. A dynamic focus (z-axis) with a scanned 3D object

ofxEpilog also enable to control the focus with a scanned
3D object. Based on a 3D curve of an object from a highresolution 3D scanner, we calculate a possible area for
engraving (red in Fig.2) and dynamically control the focus
with the given 3D model.
TECHNICAL LIMITATIONS

Because of the focal length (50.8mm) and the shape of laser
cutter’s head, we have a physical collision in a certain tool
path (P1-P2- P3 in Fig.3). To avoid the collision, the path

176

