floatio : Floating Tangible User Interface Based on
Animacy Perception
Toshiya Yui

Tomoko Hashida
Waseda University
3-4-1 Okubo Shinjuku-ku Tokyo 169-8555, Japan
yui1048119@fuji.waseda.jp, hashida@waseda.jp
ABSTRACT

of animacy [4]. However, in the TUI field, there are still
very few studies where creating a perception of animacy
has been the initial intention. Our aim in this study is
therefore to implement a TUI that can be moved in three
dimensions by users, and is also capable of moving
autonomously and has animacy qualities.

In this study, we propose floatio: a floating tangible user
interface that makes it easy to create a perception of
animacy (lifelike movement). It has been pointed out that
there are three requirements that make animacy more likely
to be perceived: interactivity, irregularities, and automatic
movement resisting the force of gravity. Based on these
requirements, floatio provides a tangible user interface
where a polystyrene ball resembling a pixel is suspended in
a stream of air where it can be positioned passively by the
user, or autonomously by the system itself. To implement
floatio, we developed three mechanisms: a floating field
mechanism, a pointer input/output mechanism and a handover mechanism. We also measured the precision of the
pointer input/output and hand-over mechanisms.

Nakayama et al. cited two properties that are required in
order to easily convey a sense of animacy: (Requirement
1) movements that interact with humans, and
(Requirement 2) movements including irregular factors
that express indecision or fluctuation [4]. Furthermore,
Nakamura et al. stated that animacy can be perceived more
immediately from automatic movements that resist the
force of gravity (Requirement 3) [5]. The autonomous
floating TUIs mentioned above all satisfy the requirements
for conveying animacy in terms of (Requirement 1) and
(Requirement 3). In this study, we focus on the use of a
stream of air as a floating technique in order to express
indecision or fluctuation (Requirement 2). A similar
floating technique is used in the Aerial Tunes system [6],
where balls appear to dance in mid-air due to instability,
and it can be confirmed that this floating motion conveys a
sense of animacy. In this study, we implement a TUI that
not only exhibits autonomy but also conveys a sense of
animacy by satisfying all of the above requirements.

Author Keywords

Tangible User Interface; Animacy Perception; 3D
Interaction;
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. User Interfaces.
INTRODUCTION

Recent studies of tangible user interfaces (TUIs) have
shown increasing interest in active or autonomous
movement that makes it possible to interact with physical
interfaces not only in 2D planes but also in 3D spaces.
Typical examples include the ZeroN system, where a ball is
suspended in a magnetic field [3], and BitDrones, which
uses miniature drones [1]. In TUIs that support autonomous
movement, it is particularly easy for humans to feel a sense
of animacy (lifelike movement), and it has been pointed out
that this can help to attract the user’s attention and increase
the system’s frequency of use [2]. In the field of robotics
research, many studies have set out with the intention of
designing a system whose movements create a perception

Figure 1: The proposed system.
IMPLEMENTATION
Overview

In this study, we propose a TUI called “floatio” that
produces a display consisting of a ball resembling a pixel
suspended in mid air, where the ball can be positioned
passively by the user and can also be positioned
autonomously by the system itself (Figure 1). To achieve
this, we implemented three mechanisms: a floating field
formation mechanism, a pointer input/output mechanism,
and a hand-over mechanism. Our system is designed to
convey a sense of animacy as discussed above by using a
floating field formation mechanism to create fluctuations
and uncertainty (Requirement 2), automatic floating

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985699

43

movements and hand-overs that resist the force of gravity
(Requirement 3), and interaction via a pointer
input/output mechanism (Requirement 1).

EVALUATION

To clarify the accuracy of the pointer input/output
mechanism and hand-over mechanism, we carried out
simple experiments to test them individually.

Floating field formation mechanism

First, we measured the precision during pointer input/output
actions (the height error of the ball when controlled by the
system, compared with the height of the ball when placed
by the user). With the current mechanism, we used a laser
rangefinder (Bosch GLM 100C) to measure the height of
the ball across the possible output range (0–175 mm) in 14
equal height increments. As shown in Figure 2, the
maximum error was about 20 mm. Next, we measured the
success rate of the hand-over mechanism. At 4 seconds per
hand-over, the success rate was 99%. And at 1.8 seconds
per hand-over, the success rate was 90%.

To enable the ball to be positioned at any height, we
implemented a mechanism that performs floating control.
To create a floating effect, we used the Coandă effect — the
phenomenon whereby a sphere can float stably in a stream
of fluid due to the way in which the fluid changes direction
as it flows around it. For the basic system configuration, we
used PCs, Arduino controllers, a polystyrene ball (diameter
~3.5 cm, weight ~1.2g), and a blower fan (SparkFun Com11270) with a variable flow rate controlled by pulse width
modulation (PWM). Also, by determining the minimum
and maximum PWM duty ratios (corresponding to the flow
rates when the ball begins to float and when the ball reaches
its maximum height) and interpolating linearly between
these duty ratios, we determined the duty ratio needed to
make the ball float at any height. With several of these fans
arranged on a plane, it is possible to form a floating field by
expanding the region where floating is possible.
3.3 Pointer input/output mechanism

Figure 2: Positioning error vs. height of ball.

We implemented a pointer input/output function whereby
input consists of grasping the ball and changing its position,
and whereby the ball continues to float in the same position
when it is released. Thus was achieved using a Kinect
system in addition to the basic system configuration. The
Kinect is used to ascertain the position and shape of the
user’s hand, and the position of the ball. From this
information, it figures out whether or not the user is holding
the ball, and if so, the output of the fan directly beneath the
ball is updated to match the ball’s position. In this way, the
ball stays where it is when the user releases it, allowing
system to show the finished input position. This makes it
possible to perform pointer operations where the input and
output are represented by the position to which the ball is
moved when the user holds it.

APPLICATION

By combining the three mechanisms mentioned above, we
implemented an application that operates a slider by making
a single ball follow the user (Figure 3). Of the five fans
arranged in a row, the ball is handed over to the fan closest
to the user’s position. This can be operated as a slider by
having the user change the height of the ball above the fan.
With this implementation, we confirmed that it was
possible for the ball to move to the intended position, and
for the user to operate the system as a slider.

3.4 Hand-over mechanism

To move the ball to any fan situated on the plane, we
implemented a mechanism for handing over the ball from
one fan to another. In addition to the basic system
configuration, this is configured from servo motors that
change the direction in which the ball is to be passed, and
servo motors that tilt the fans forwards and backwards. The
hand-over method involves keeping the ball at a height of
about 10 cm, and then tilting the fan at an angle of about
70° in the direction in which the ball is to be handed over.
This causes the ball to fall onto the neighboring fan situated
19 cm away, and the hand-over is complete. To improve the
hand-over success rate, we attached a saucer of 9 cm in
diameter around the outlet of each fan. The hand-over
mechanism made it possible for the system to move the ball
autonomously in three dimensions when the fans are
arranged in the form of an array.

Figure 3: A slider application that tracks the user.
CONCLUSION

We have designed a floating TUI based on the findings
relating to animacy perception. We exhibited floatio with a
pointer function at the Interaction 2016 event (held at the
Science Museum on March 3, 2016) and invited 200
visitors to try it out. They reported that the system was
“cute” and “like a living thing”, thus showing that animacy
was perceived. Many of them were also very interested in
the system, and were keen to interact with it.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper is a part of the outcome of research performed
under a Waseda University Grant for Special Research
Projects (Project number: 2015A-502).

44

REFERENCES

1. Antonio Gomes, Calvin Rubens, Sean Braley, and Roel
Vertegaal. BitDrones: Towards Using 3D Nanocopter
Displays as Interactive Self-Levitating Programmable
Matter. In Proc. CHI '16. 770 – 780. 2016.

4. Ko Nakamura and Shigemasa Sumi. Motion information
contributing to the perception of animacy or inanimacy
from the motion of a single object. The Institute of
Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers,
2002.

2. Diana Nowacka. Autonomous Behaviour in Tangible
User Interfaces as a Design Factor. In Proc. TEI '14,
289-292, 2014.

5. Momoka Nakayama and Shunji Yamanaka. Animacy
Perception by Linear Motion Simple Group Robots.
IPSJ Interaction 2016.

3. Jinha Lee, Rehmi Post, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2011. ZeroN:
Mid-air tangible interaction enabled by computer
controlled magnetic levitation. In Proc. UIST '11, 327336.

6. Tobias Alrøe, Jonas Grann, Erik Grönvall, Marianne
Graves Petersen, Jesper L. Rasmussen. Aerial tunes:
exploring interaction qualities of mid-air displays. In
Proc. NordiCHI '12. 514-523. 2012.

45

