Aided Eyes: Eye Activity Sensing for Daily Life
Yoshio Ishiguro† , Adiyan Mujibiya† , Takashi Miyaki‡ , and Jun Rekimoto‡,§
†Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo Japan
‡Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo Japan
§Sony Computer Science Laboratories, 3-14-13 Higashigotanda, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan
{ishiy, adiyan, miyaki, rekimoto}@acm.org

ABSTRACT

General Terms

Our eyes collect a considerable amount of information when
we use them to look at objects. In particular, eye movement
allows us to gaze at an object and shows our level of interest
in the object. In this research, we propose a method that
involves real-time measurement of eye movement for human
memory enhancement; the method employs gaze-indexed
images captured using a video camera that is attached to
the user’s glasses. We present a prototype system with an
infrared-based corneal limbus tracking method. Although
the existing eye tracker systems track eye movement with
high accuracy, they are not suitable for daily use because
the mobility of these systems is incompatible with a high
sampling rate. Our prototype has small phototransistors,
infrared LEDs, and a video camera, which make it possible
to attach the entire system to the glasses. Additionally, the
accuracy of this method is compensated by combining image
processing methods and contextual information, such as eye
direction, for information extraction. We develop an information extraction system with real-time object recognition
in the user’s visual attention area by using the prototype
of an eye tracker and a head-mounted camera. We apply
this system to (1) fast object recognition by using a SURF
descriptor that is limited to the gaze area and (2) descriptor matching of a past-images database. Face recognition
by using haar-like object features and text logging by using
OCR technology is also implemented. The combination of
a low-resolution camera and a high-resolution, wide-angle
camera is studied for high daily usability. The possibility of
gaze-guided computer vision is discussed in this paper, as is
the topic of communication by the photo transistor in the
eye tracker and the development of a sensor system that has
a high transparency.

Information extracting for lifelog

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User
Interfaces—Theory and methods

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
Augmented Human Conference April 2-3, 2010, Megève, France
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-825-4/10/04 ...$10.00.

Keywords
Eye tracking, Lifelog computing, Gaze information

1.

INTRODUCTION

Lifelog systems have been a topic of considerable research
[3]. The development of a lifelog computing system has led
to the hope that the human memory can be augmented. For
extracting beneficial information from augmented human
memory, we consider the “five W’s and one H” (Who, What,
When, Where, Why, and How). These provide very important contextual information. Location estimation methods
can answer “Where” [12], and a wearable camera can provide the other information. However, we cannot accurately
detect a person’s actions by using only image information.
According to visual lifelog researches, it is definitely necessary to extract important parts of life events from enormous
amounts of data, such as people, objects, and texts that we
pay attention to. Therefore, we consider using eye activity
for obtaining contextual information.
Eye tracking has been extensively studied in medical, psychological, and user interface (UI) researches [5, 6] for more
than a century. The study of eye tracking has provided us
with a considerable amount of information such as gazed
object, stress, concentration ratio, and degree of interest in
the objects [4]. Interaction research using eye tracking has
been studied. In particular, in this field, wearable computing research has been actively studied using eye movements
(gaze information) because wearable devices allow intuitive
and free-hand control [17].
Even though the current eye tracking method was developed several decades ago, it still involves the use of headgear
with horns that are embedded camera or requires electrodes
to be pasted on the user’s face and/or other large-scale systems to be used for a psychological experiment. In other
words, this system currently cannot be used for daily activities. In this case, a “daily usable system” means a commonly
acceptable system that can be used in public in daily life.
Moreover, making the system accurate as well as portable
is a complicated task. A daily usable system for eye activity sensing could be utilized in many research areas such as
wearable computing.

# '"!

#
!

•! !!
(#! )!%!""
#"&"!"*!

 !
!
$!

!



 # *!

!"#$%&'(
)*+*,*-$!

 !
 !
 "$!
$!
"!
 !
$!

•!  !

!" $ "!!!

  "
 "  " "!

Figure 1: Concept of the eye enhanced lifelog computing

In this research, for human memory enhancement, we
examine a method to extract significant information from
large-scale lifelog data by using eye activity information.
We develop a new method that involves real-time measurement of eye movements for automated information extraction. The method makes use of gaze-indexed images captured by a video camera and an eye tracker with a low accuracy but a high wearability; both the camera and the eye
tracker are attached to the user’s glasses.

2. EYE-ENHANCED LIFELOG COMPUTING
Lifelog with a surrounding video image can give us a considerable amount of information. On the other hand, humans obtain surrounding information from their eyes and
gaze at interesting objects. However, it is impossible to
record this type of information by using only a camera. Consequently, first, the gazed information is detected from a
video. Then, the gazed objects and the user’s state are extracted from the video and the eye movement. After this,
related information is retrieved by the extracted information. Finally, the results are added to lifelog as shown in
Figure 1. For such reasons, we need to record three types of
eye activity —gaze direction, eye movement, and eye
blink frequency— for using lifelog and UI methodology.
Details of each type of eye activity are explained in this section.

2.1 Gaze Direction
It is difficult to extract significant information from the
video image of large-scale personal life log data. For example, omnidirectional-camera video images contain a considerable amount of information that is not related to human
memories; the camera image may not relate to the gazed
object. Therefore, it is difficult to know which objects are
being focused on only from the images. In this research, obtaining a video lifelog with gaze information is our objective.
Gazed objects such as faces and texts are extracted from a
video lifelog, and this information is used for understanding
whom you met, what you saw, and what you were interested
in.

Gaze direction is used for pointing in the UI research area;
however, it is well known that has “Midas touch problem”
and that it is difficult to use gaze direction without a trigger
such as a key input [8].

2.2

Eye Movement

Not only the gaze direction but also the eye movement has
meaning. In particular, microsaccade indicates the target
of one’s potential interest [4]. The microsaccade is a very
quick eye movement, almost 600◦ /s, and it is a spontaneous
movement caused when the eye gazes at stable targets. The
frequency and direction of this movement change depending
on the person’s interest in the target. The measurement of
this movement makes it possible to know human susceptibilities. The holding time of a gazed object is a conscious
movement, and the saccadic movement is an unconscious
movement. Therefore, it is possible to extract more information from a susceptible mind by the measurement of saccadic
movements.

2.3

Eye Blink Frequency

Previous research shows that eye movements can provide
information about a person’s condition. For example, the
eye blink frequency shows the person’s degree of concentration on his/her work [15].
The eye blink frequency decreases when a person concentrates on his/her work. In contrast, the frequency increases
when he/she is not very focused on his/her work. Therefore,
the measurement and detection of the eye blink frequency
can estimate the person’s level of concentration. The eye
blink has several characteristics. It is a motion that is approximately 150 ms fast. An involuntary eye blink is an
automatic eye blink that has a shorter motion time than
the voluntary eye blink, which is a conscious eye blink.

3.
3.1

DESIGN OF EYEGLASS-EMBEDDED EYE
ACTIVITY SENSOR
Requested Specification for Eye Sensing

The capability requirement is discussed in Section 2. Eye
movements are typically classified as ductions, versions, or

!."#/$#0"(12%/(
(3&%4'5(/6$#7"68(#$4"6$9!

(6:#"55%2)(12%/((
3(:;"6(5:16#"8(*4.8(+(,9!

  !
  !

"
 !

Figure 2: Prototype eye gaze recognizer with camera for lifelog
vergences. Eye movement has several moving speeds. There
are several types of high-speed eye movements. For example, the microsaccade frequency is more than 1000 Hz, and
the eye blink speed is around 150 ms. The method must distinguish precisely between eye movement and blinks for an
accurate detection of eye movements. Further, the human
view angle is almost 160◦ for each eye. Therefore, a 5◦ resolution is sufficient for information extraction because this
system aims not only to achieve a high accuracy but also
extract information by a daily usable system using a combination of eye activity information and image processing
methods.

3.2 Eye-tracking Technology Candidates
There are several types of eye trackers. In this study, we
consider in four different trackers:
Camera based system: The video-based systems [9, 11]
can capture a gaze texture image. This is the most commonly used tracker; however, it requires an extremely sophisticated optics system having a light source, lenses, and
half mirrors. Additionally, it requires a large (table top
size) measurement system for quick eye movements (over
1000 Hz). Scale-wise, it is possible to develop a smaller
system; however, currently, such a system cannot measure
high-speed eye movements.
Search coil and Optical lever: These methods [13, 18]
are used for laboratory experiments in a certain region of
space. However, these methods are not user friendly as the
users are expected to wear special contact lenses that using
a negative pressure on their eyes.

sufficiently detect eye blinks. Therefore, it has a high constructability for daily use.
Therefore, we use an “infrared corneal limbus tracker” in
our study. This method has a lower accuracy than the
method of search coil and optical lever. However, our purpose is to extract significant information; hence, the accuracy of this method can be enhanced by combining image
processing methods and contextual information such as eye
direction.

3.3

Prototype of Eye Activity Sensor

Four phototransistors and two infrared LEDs are mounted
on the eye glassed as shown in Figure 2. A small camera is
mounted on the glasses for recording surrounding information, and not for eye tracking. An infrared LED and four
phototransistors are mounted inside of the glasses.
The infrared light is reflected by the eye surface and is
received by the phototransistor. These sensor values throw
to instrumentation amplifier and analog/digital (AD) conversion, then input to the microprocessing unit (MPU). In
this study, ATmega128 from Atmel is used for the MPU and
AD conversion. The MPU clock frequency is 16 MHz, and
the AD conversion time is 16µs per channel.
Before the measurement, the head position and the display
are fixed for a calibration, and then, the display shows the
targets to be gazed in the calibration (Figure 3). The sensor
wearer gazes at the target object on the display, and the
MPU records the sensor value. One target has 240 points
(W 20 points x H 12 points) and each points are gazed for 1
second. After the calibration, the system estimates the gaze
direction by using the recorded data. The recorded data
and sensor value are compared first. Then, the center of
gravity is calculated from the result in order to estimate the
gaze direction. Simple method is enough for this research
because only gaze area in the picture is needed to know for
using information extraction system.

Electrooculogram (EOG): Eyes have a steady electric
potential field, and this electric signal can be derived by using two pairs of contact electrodes that are placed on the
skin around one eye. This is a very lightweight approach [2]
and can work if the eyes are closed. However, it requires an
eye blink detection method and has other issues. For example, an electrode is required and is affected by electronoise.

3.4

Infrared corneal limbus tracker: An infrared corneal
limbus tracker [14] is also a very lightweight tracker. It can
be built by using a light source (infrared LED) and light
sensors (phototransistor) and only requires very low computational power. This approach is also affected by noise
from environmental light. However, this is a very simple
approach; no electrodes are required. This approach can

When an infrared limbus tracking method is used, the
sensor value is changed rapidly by eye blinking. The speed
is approximately 150 ms, as shown in Figure 4. Therefore,
the system can simply distinguish between blinks and other
eye movements. Further, the system extracts information
as face, texts, and preregistered objects. Pre-registered objects are recognized in real time by the user’s visual attention
area. We use fast object recognition by using the SURF [1]

Life Events Extracting System

)#*'"*'('%%''!

&"'(%%"!

!



 !

&"#"!
&"#"


 %!!
%!

"$!
"$

!

!

!

!"#($%%%!


#'"!

' #'!

!

!

 !

!

 
!


!

!!

!

 !

Figure 6: An example graph of eye blink frequency
Figure 3: A calibration method for the gaze recognizer system. The head position and the display are
fixed for a calibration and then the display shows
targets. A user gazes target object on the display
and MPU records sensor value.

   !

      !

descriptor for matching images that is limited to the gazed
area with the past-images database (Figure 5).
Face recognition using haar-like objects by “OpenCV Library1 ” is implemented for logging of “When I meet someone.” This method can extract the human face first, and
then the system records the time, location, and face image.
Additionally, text logging with the OCR technology “tesseractocr2 ” is implemented. This system can extract a clipped image, wherein it is clipped that gazed area of head-mounted
camera image. This system attempts to extract text from
these clipped images. Finally, the extracted text is recorded
along with time and location data for life logging.

4.

   !
  !

4.1
 

!

Figure 4: An example of a fluctuation in the sensor
data by an eye blink

   !
  !

    !

Figure 5: Image feature extraction by SURF [1], for
real time object recognition

Concentration State Measurements

Our system can detect eye blinks with a high accuracy.
We recorded the eye-blink detection and the user’s tasks for
approximately 1 hour, as shown in Figure 6. The results
showed that the eye blink frequency changed with a change
in the tasks. The frequency was slower when the user concentrated on the objects. Therefore, the system could tell
the user’s concentration states and we consider that can use
for human interface technique such as displaying and annotation.

4.3
 

Preliminary Experiment

An infrared limbus tracker is a commonly used tracker;
therefore, the detail of hardware evaluation experiment is
spared. We checked the specifications of the proposed prototype system. More than 99% of the eye blinks were detected
in 3 min. Very slow eye blinks caused the 1% failure of detection. The gaze direction angle was 5◦ , and the processing
rate was set as 160 Hz in the preliminary experiments.

4.2
  !

CASE STUDY USING PROTOTYPE SYSTEM

Life Event Extraction

The proposed method in this study extracts pre-registered
objects, human face, and character by using images and eye
gaze information. Figures 7 and 8 show the extraction of
objects such as posters. In this situation, the user observes
each poster of the 100 pre-registered posters in the room.
1
2

http://opencv.willowgarage.com/wiki/
http://code.google.com/p/tesseract-ocr/

!

   !

!"$!

   

% "!

!

!

!
!
!
!

! ! ! ! ! !

!

!

! ! ! ! !

!!
$" " !#"!

 !

Figure 7: Photographs of experimental environment

   
    
     !

!

!

!
!
!
!
!
!

$" " !

!

! ! ! ! ! !

!

!

! ! ! ! !

!!

  !

Figure 9: Gaze direction and extraction results (ID
0 means no objects was extracted)

  !

Figure 8: Object recognition scene by proposed system. This figure shows that the object recognition
system can identify two different objects next each
other.
The IDs of these extracted objects are logged with time, actual images, and the eye direction when the system detects
the pre-registered objects, as shown in Figure 9. Figure 10
shows the optical character reading of the gazed information. An image of the gazed area is clipped, characters are
extracted from the clipped image. Additionally, the face
image is extracted along with the actual time, as shown in
Figure 11. Usually, when multiple people stand in front of
the camera, such as in a city or a meeting room, the normal
recorded video image does not tell you who you are looking
at. However, this method can pick up who you are looking
at by using gaze information. Our system can handled with
multiple objects that shown up in head-mounted camera.
Finally, these three pieces of data are logged automatically.

 !

   

!

Figure 10: An example image of OCR extraction for
clipped image by gaze information using tesseractocr

5. HIGHER REALIZATION OF DAILY USABILITY AND FUTURE POSSIBILITES
From these case studies, it is concluded that information
extraction by means of image processing requires the use of
a wide-angle, high-resolution camera for providing more accurate information. However, it is difficult to mount such a
device on a person’s head. Moreover, the prototype of the
infrared limbus tracker is very small, but the phototransistors obstruct the user’s view. In this section, a combination
of a wide-angle, high-resolution camera and a head-mounted
camera along with the limbus tracker structure without phototransistors is discussed.

5.1 Combination with High Resolution Wide
Angle Camera
Having a large-size camera such as a commercially used

 !

  

  !

Figure 11: An example image of face extraction.
Faces are extracted from clipped image of headmpunted camera by gaze information.

$"  !

"
!! !

    !
  "
  !

" "!
  !

!"!

 " !

""
 ""
$$!# !  $ !
!

 

!

 !"!

#  !"!

Figure 13: Illustrations of transparent infrared
corneal limbus tracker

      !

Figure 12: An example image of view point in wideangle camera by head-mounted camera. Gazed position in head-mounted camera is known, thus it is
possible to project gaze position to high resolution
camera image by using position relation of two images.

USB camera mounted on the head interferes in daily communication. Therefore, we embed a very small, poor-resolution
camera for capturing the surrounding information in the eye
tracker. Hence, this camera can be integrated into the user’s
eye glasses and can capture the user’s actual view. On
the other hand, the small camera has a very poor performance, and it is difficult to obtain a high frame rate and
a high resolution by using such a camera. Therefore, the
image processing of information extraction methods is at
times not possible. Therefore, we consider a strap-on camera (such as SenseCam [7] that can be dangled around one’s
neck) that has fewer problems than a head-mounted camera. Strap-on cameras do not disturb any communication
and can be attached to the body more easily than a headmounted camera. Therefore, we can use a high-resolution
camera with wide-angle lens. This prototype system compares the SURF descriptor between the head-mounted camera and the strap-on camera and then calculates the homography matrix. From the results, we can identify the focus
of the head-mounted camera from the strap-on camera’s images. As a result, a high-resolution image can be used for
the information extraction, as shown in Figure 12.

5.2 Improving Transparency of Eye-tracker
Developing a new system for daily use that is so comfortable that the user is not even aware of wearing it is our
long-term objective. The infrared limbus tracker has a very
simple mechanism; therefore, it has highly possibility that
modification of camera based system. This tracker does not
require lens and focal distance. The camera-based system
can use a half mirror to see the eye image; however, the system has to be in front of the eyes, as shown in Figure 13.
Because of the above-mentioned reasons, we consider a
transmissive sensor system. The infrared limbus tracker
does not have a focal point unlike a camera, and it is easy

to design the light path, as explained in Figure 13. In this
figure, acrylic boards (refractive index = 1.49) are chamfered at approximately 30◦ , and an infrared reflection filter
is placed in between. The infrared light reflected by the eye
completely reflected in the acrylic material, and then, the
light is received by the phototransistor that is placed out of
the user’s view.

5.3

Modulated Light for Robustness Improvement and Using for Information Transmission

Since the infrared cornea limbus tracker is affected by the
environmental light, this method needs to be devised such
that the infrared light can be modulated for a lock-in amplifier (also known as a phase-sensitive detector) [16]. In
other words, this tracker allows the measurement of environmental light through a reflecting eye surface. In fact, the
embedded phototransistor received the modulated backlight
of the normal display from the user’s view during the experiments. This phenomenon with a lock-in amplifier can
isolate the reflected light from the modulated tracker light
source that measures eye movements and the modulated environmental light. It is also possible to get information from
objects when the user gaze light sources as studied in [10].

6.

CONCLUSIONS

In this research, we have described an infrared corneal limbus tracker system to measure the eye activity for contextual
information obtained by information extraction from the
lifelog database. It is possible to use the proposed method
in daily life. In fact, we combined the low-accuracy, highwearability eye tracker and image processing methods in our
system. In the case study, we could detect the eye blinks
with a high accuracy and estimate the participant’s concentration state. Then, we combined this tracker and an image
processing method such as face detection, OCR, and object
recognition. Our eye tracking system and eye activity information successfully extracted significant information from
the lifelog database.
Finally, we discussed the possibility of developing a transmissive sensor system with an infrared corneal limbus tracker
and two cameras having different resolutions for our longterm objective of designing a system suitable for daily use.
In addition, since the eyes follow objects even when the
user’s body moves, information about the eye direction can
be used for image stabilization and it can be effective utilized
in image extraction methods. We believe this research can

contribute to the utilization of augmented human memory.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by the Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Grant-in-Aid for
JSPS Fellows, 21-8596, 2009.

8. REFERENCES
[1] H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, and L. V. Gool. Surf: Speeded
up robust features. In 9th European Conf. on
Computer Vision, May 2006.
[2] A. Bulling, D. Roggen, and G. Tröster. Wearable eog
goggles: eye-based interaction in everyday
environments. In Proc. of the 27th int. conf. extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 3259–3264, 2009.
[3] B. P. Clarkson. Life Patterns: structure from wearable
sensors. Ph.D thesis, 2002.
[4] S. M. Conde and S. L. Macknik. Windows onthe mind.
Scientific American, 297(2):56–63, 2007.
[5] A. Duchowski. Eye Tracking Methodology. Springer,
2007.
[6] J. M. Findlay and I. D. Gilchrist. Active Vision: The
Psychology of Looking and Seeing. Oxford University
Press, 2003.
[7] J. Gemmell, G. Bell, and R. Lueder. MyLifeBits: a
personal database for everything. Commun. ACM,
49(1):88–95, 2006.
[8] R. J. K. Jacob. Eye movement-based human-computer
interaction techniques: Toward non-command
interfaces. In Advances in Human-Computer
Interaction, pages 151–190. Ablex Publishing Co,
1993.
[9] D. Li, J. Babcock, and D. J. Parkhurst. openEyes: a
low-cost head-mounted eye-tracking solution. In Proc.
of the 2006 symp. on Eye tracking research &
applications, pages 95–100, 2006.
[10] Y. Mitsudo. A real-world pointing device based on an
optical communication system. In Proc. of the 3rd Int.
Conf. on Virtual and Mixed Reality, pages 70–79,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. Springer-Verlag.
[11] T. Ohno. Freegaze : a gaze tracking system for
everyday gaze interaction. Proc. of the symp. on eye
tracking research & applications symposium, 2002.
[12] J. Rekimoto, T. Miyaki, and T. Ishizawa. Life-Tag:
WiFi-based continuous location logging for life pattern
analysis. In 3rd Int. Symp. on Location- and
Context-Awareness, pages 35–49, 2007.
[13] D. Robinson. A method of measuring eye movement
using a scleral search coil in a magnetic field. In IEEE
Trans. on Bio-Medical Electrics, number 10, pages
137–145, 1963.
[14] W. M. Smith and J. Peter J. Warter. Eye movement
and stimulus movement; new photoelectric
electromechanical system for recording and measuring
tracking motions of the eye. J. Opt. Soc. Am.,
50(3):245, 1960.
[15] J. A. Stern, L. C. Walrath, and R. Goldstein. The
endogenous eyeblink. Psychophysiology, 21(1):22–33,
1983.

[16] P. A. Temple. An introduction to phase-sensitive
amplifiers: An inexpensive student instrument.
American Journal of Physics, 43(9):801–807, 1975.
[17] D. J. Ward and D. J. C. MacKay. Artificial
intelligence: Fast hands-free writing by gaze direction.
Nature, 418:838, 2002.
[18] A. Yarbus. Eye movements and vision. Plenum Press,
1967.

