Work in Progress

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

Demulti Display: A Multiplayer Gaming
Environment for Mitigating the Skills
Gap
Shogo Yamashita
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
shogo-yamashita@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp

Jun Rekimoto
The University of Tokyo
Sony Computer Science
Laboratories
Tokyo, Japan
rekimoto@acm.org

Akira Mastuda
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
akira.matsuda.ut@gmail.com
Natsuki Hamanishi
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
hamanishinatsukilab@gmail.com
Shunichi Suwa
Sony Computer Science
Laboratories
Tokyo, Japan
Shunichi.Suwa@sony.com

Abstract
Although doing sports and games together is effective to
create good social connections, a large skill gap among
players reduces the enjoyment in such activities. In this research, we technologically enhance sports and gaming activities in the real world. The gaming environment is aimed
at mitigating the differences in ability without reducing the
enjoyment. For the initial approach of the research, we implemented a setup for enhancing table games by using a
liquid crystals display. The system shows different images
to each player using a polarization-based technique. As the
application, we implemented an augmented PONG game.
The game has a function to support players depending on
their scores in the match. This setup can apply to a projector for a wider gaming field for enhancing game activities
requiring body movements such as Table Tennis and Air
Hockey.

Author Keywords
Augmented Sports; Skills Gap; Multiplex Imagery
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
TEI’17 , March 20-23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan.
Copyright © 2017 ACM 978-1-4503-4676-4/17/03.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3024969.3025074

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]:
Miscellaneous

457

Work in Progress

Multiplayer table game
(Card games, Pong, Board games, et al. )

Each player sees different
images on the same screen

Figure 1: A multiplayer gaming
environment configured by Demulti
Display. The environment shows
different images to each player
looking at the same screen.

Demulti Display
Video display device

Figure 2: Demulti Display: A liquid
crystal panel changing the
polarization angles of lights from a
video display device (Display,
projector, et at.) on each pixel.
Demulti Display is on a liquid
crystal display in this picture.

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

Introduction

Related Work

Doing game activities together is good for creating social
connections with others. However, significant differences
in ability among players might reduce the enjoyment and
create a sense of discomfort during the activity. In general, players with more experience make allowances for the
opponents to avoid this situation. Nevertheless, this effort
eventually reduces the total enjoyment of the event since
other players sometimes feel the effort of the skill modification.

There are several types of research on technologically augmented sports and games. The Bouncing Star project [3],
and HoverBall [7] aim to enhance sports using balls. The
balls implemented by the projects fly and move in the gaming field by actuators such as a jet spraying device and
propellers. The systems can moderate the skill difference
among players in the activity. However, the applications
are still limited due to the restriction of the machines such
as battery life and robustness. Lumisight Table [4] and ExField [1] can provide different images to users surrounding
a screen by using a parallax-barrier-based technology. The
system shows some images simultaneously, but users can
only see one of the images from the same direction. Therefore, the system cannot provide different images to users
sitting or standing on the same side, which some board
games require. ExPixel [8] can also provide different images to users by using a polarization-based technology.
However, this setup requires two projectors with circular polarization filters, while our system can use an LCD or a projector for household use. In existing research on displays
capable of presenting personalized information to different
users, there are no investigations on skill-deference moderation in games [6, 5]. Augmented Reality glasses can
provide the augmented gaming environment. However, the
limited size of the field of view may reduce the experience.

In the case of playing video games, players can fill the gap
in ability among players without reducing the enjoyment.
The reason is that players can use a stronger player character and/or useful items to modify their abilities. On the
other hand, in the real world, acquiring abilities for a game
consumes considerable amounts of time and efforts. Therefore, filling the gap during the activity is not feasible in most
cases.
In this research, we technologically enhance games using
tangibles in the real world to mitigate the skills gap among
players. The installation improves their abilities in real-time
depending on the scores in the game. For instance, in the
case of an air-hockey game using paddles, the losing player
can have skills of vanishing shots and/or curve shots. For
the initial approach of the research, we implemented a
setup for enhancing table-game experiences such as a
board game and a card game (Figure 1). The system is
a liquid crystal panel that can change polarization angles
from a video display device such as a display and a projector. We named the panel Demulti Display. The gaming
environment with Demulti Display can show different images to each player looking at the same environment, and
change the difficulty of the game in accordance with their
ability.

Demulti Display
Demulti Display can be configured for a multiplayer gaming
environment for table games. The environment can show
different images to each player by a polarization-based
technique. This technology enables the game to provide
appropriate difficulty to each player looking at the same
gaming field in accordance with the ability of the player.
This should mitigate the skills gap among players without
reducing the enjoyment.

458

Work in Progress

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

Implementation

(a) Three square-shaped graphics
displayed on a liquid crystal display

(b) View from player 1
wearing glasses with polarizing sheets
(polarizing angle 45◦)

(c) View from player 2
wearing glasses with polarizing sheets
(polarizing angle -45◦)

Figure 3: A table gaming
environment configured with
Demulti Display. The environment
can show different images to each
player by a polarization-based
technique. Two players wear
glasses coated with polarizing
sheets.

System configuration
Demulti Display is a liquid crystals panel, which can be
mounted on a video display device such as a display and a
projector. Figure 2 shows the configuration of a gaming environment using a display (LCD) with Demulti Display. Both
of the panel and the display are connected to a computer.
In the game, two players wear glasses made of polarizing
sheets, and they can sit face-to-face or on the same side
of the setup. The polarization angle of glasses for one of
the players makes a right angle with the other glasses of
players.
Providing different images to each player
The LCD under the Demulti Display emits polarized light
from the screen. Each pixel on the panel has the ability to
change the angle of polarized light. Therefore, the Demulti
Display can create images, which have different polarization angles on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Figure 3 (a) shows
the view of the display. (b) is the view of player 1 wearing glasses with polarizing sheets (polarizing angle 45◦ ),
and (c) is the view of player 2 (polarizing angle −45◦ ). As
shown in Figure 3 (b), the red square on the right is invisible from player 1, and the green square on the left is
hidden from player 2. The reason is that light shielding occurs when the polarization angles of light from the screen
are at a right angle to the angle of polarizing sheets on the
glasses.
Liquid crystal panel
We took the liquid crystal panel apart from a color TN-type
LCD (VL-178SSL). We removed the liquid crystal layer
coated with two polarizing sheets in the LCD. The number of pixels is 1280 × 1080. Each pixel consists of three
sections to control the polarization angles for three colors (RGB). The rotation angles through each section are

Display1 :
Display on computer	

Display3 :
Display2 :
Liquid crystal display 	 Demulti Display	

[0,1280]

[1280,1080]

[2560,1080]

1280 × 1080 pixels 	 1280 × 1080 pixels 	
A window with computer graphics to provide player dependent view

Figure 4: The multi-display configuration of the computer. A
window with computer graphics to provide the player-dependent
views is placed at the left edge of the display 2, and the right edge
of the window matches with the right side of display 3.

changeable via a D-sub port in the same way as a subdisplay connected to a computer. For instance, displaying
whole white screen on the panel means rotating the polarizing angles by around 90◦ to 120◦ on all pixels. Displaying
gray screen changes the polarizing angles by around 45◦ to
60◦ . The rotation angle depends on the liquid crystal panel.

Example Program
We shows a example for showing a blue square to each
player, a green square to one of the players only and a red
square to the other player as shown in Figure 3 in this section.
Display setting
The multi-display configuration of the computer is shown
in Figure 4. Figure 5 shows the window to change the polarization angles for providing different images to players.
The display on the computer, LCD, and Demulti Display are

459

Work in Progress

[0,0] 	

[1280, 0] 	

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

[2560, 0] 	
A gray mask
for blue square
(Visible from
both players)	

[0,1280]

[1280,1080]

1280 Pixels	

[2560,1080]

A white mask
for red square
(Visible only
from one player)	

recognized as display 1, display 2, and display 3 respectively. Display 2 is placed at the right side of the display 1,
and display 3 is set just right side of the display 2 in the
multi-display setting. In Figure 4, we generate a window of
2560 × 1080, and place the left edge of the window to the
left edge of display 2. The right side of the window matches
with the right edge of display 3.

[2560, 0] 	

[1280, 0] 	

Display2 :
Demulti Display 	
[0,0] 	

Figure 5: A window to show the
red square only to one of the
players, and green to the other
player, and blue square to both of
the players.

Software setting
The computer graphics to provide the player-dependent
views is as follows. The setup shows the red square only
to one of the players, and green to the other player. Both of
the players can see the blue square.
We create three 200 pixels squares on display 2 for the
LCD in the window between [0,0] and [1280,0] as shown
in Figure 5. In addition, we create two 200 pixels squares
on display 3 in the windows between [1280,0] and [2560,0].
The X value of the gray square is 1280 pixels right of the
blue square, and the X value of the white square is 1280
pixels right of the red square. Both squares’ Y values are
the same as them. This setting matches the physical size
and position of the white and gray square with the red square
and blue square respectively as shown in Figure 6.

Display3 :
Liquid Crystals
Display 	

Display1 :
Display on
computer	

Figure 6: The resolution and size of the LCD are the same
as the Demulti Display. The size and position of the white
and gray squares physically match with the red square and
blue square respectively.
45°	

Lights from the LCD
are polarized, and the
polarized angle is 45°
The polarized angle is
rotated by 45°
counterclockwise

0°	

The mechanism to provide different images to players is
shown in Figure 7. The pixels on the red square rotate the
polarization angle by around 90◦ counterclockwise from the
original angle. The pixels on the blue square rotate the polarization angle by around 45◦ . By the rotation, the polarization angles on the red square become −45◦ , and those on
the blue square become 0◦ . For this reason, player 1 (polarizing angle 45◦ ) cannot see the red square, and player 2
(polarizing angle −45◦ ) cannot see the green square.

Display cable

[1280, 0] 	

1280 Pixels	

The polarized angle is
rotated by 90°
45°	

-45°	

Figure 7: Polarization angles on the environment. The
masks on Demulti Display rotate polarization angles. By the
rotation, the polarization angles on the red square become
−45◦ , and those on the blue square become 0◦ .

460

Work in Progress

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

Calibration
Polarizing Sheet

Figure 8: A calibration method for
physically matching the sizes and
intervals of masks on Demulti
Display with the graphics on the
LCD.

The size of the computer graphics on the LCD must physically match with the masks on the Demulti Display. For calibration, the LCD displays fixed size crosses on the screen
in the same intervals, and Demulti Display shows squares
on the screen in the same way. By mounting a polarizing
sheet, we can see both of the graphics on the LCD and the
panel as shown in Figure 8. For matching the physical sizes
of the graphics on the display and Demulti Display, users
can expand and/or scale down the graphics by a simple
GUI.

Application: Augmented Pong Game
We implemented an augmented pong game using the function to provide different images to each player. In the game,
players control bars to bounce a ball to other side using
paddles in the real world. A USB camera takes images of
the fields around each paddle, and the system tracks the
paddles using an image processing technology known as
optical flow. In the gaming area, a box titled "Item" appears
at a random place at random intervals. If the ball hits the
box, the player gets one supporting item giving them an advantage in the game. We implemented two items from the
"item" box as follows.
Small ghosts bouncing the ball: A number of ghosts appear in the gaming field. They are invisible for one of
the players. They bounce the ball to the other direction when they hit the ball.
Big ghosts hiding the ball: A few ghosts appear in the
filed. One of the players cannot see the ball while it is
under one of the ghosts.
Since one of the players cannot see the ghost, he/she cannot predict the direction change of the ball in the game.

This function enhances the difficulty in the pong game only
for one player. Moreover, the losing player gets stronger
support than the winning player, such as bigger and more
ghosts. Therefore, players would be able to enjoy the game
independent of their skill even if there is a large skill gap between players. For a pilot study to validate the function, two
players played the game. During the game, one of the players commented, "The bounce of the ball by a hidden goat
is unexpected and difficult to receive." However, the other
player mentioned, "I can slightly see the ghost, and can
predict the bounce indeed." This contradiction is caused because the system still has a limitation that it can not completely hide the image for one of the players. We found
the system can increase the difficulty only for a player, but
more quantitative analyses are required to validate the concept [9, 2].

Limitations and Solution
The system uses linear polarization to separate images to
each player. Because of this, the function is only available
when players view the gaming field from fixed angles. For
example, if player1 moves the head position or orientation,
he/she can somewhat see the graphics for player 2 in the
gaming field. Therefore, players cannot change their head
positions. Another issue is that players can slightly see the
graphics hidden even if the panel rotates the polarized angles by 90◦ counterclockwise from the original angle from a
player.
Circular polarization instead of the linear polarization solves
the first issue as follows: If we put a quarter-wave plate on
the Demulti Display, the panel emits circular polarization.
In this case, the players can wear 3D glasses using circular polarization, which are widely used for 3D movies. To
let player 1 only see right or left handed circularly polarized lights, we can put a half-wave plate on one side of the

461

Work in Progress

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

Projector	
Demulti
Display	

Figure 9: Augmented Air hockey
using a projector with Demulti
Display. The setup can hide the
puck from one of the players by
projecting exactly same color as
the puck or by showing fake pucks
in the field.
n’t
do !
ou here
fy
! I iece
e
P
os
u L the
Secret hand-write
Yo ve
message from
mo
third person 	

Figure 10: Board games
enhancement. In the game, an
experienced third person can help
the less experienced player by
showing secret messages or
diagrams only visible from him/her
in the gaming field.

glasses. To let player 2 only see the opposite rotation direction of circularly polarized lights, we can put a half-wave
plate on the other side of the glasses. This plate reverses
the rotation direction of the circular polarization. Therefore,
the 3D glasses with a half-wave plate carry only left or right
circularly polarized lights to player 1 or player 2 respectively.
A characteristic of TN-type LCD causes the second issue.
Using an IPS-type LCD as Demulti Display can solve the
problem. Using a DLP-Link type of 3D projector is also an
alternative; however, this requires customized active shutter
glasses where each side can down the shutters at the same
time. We can also use the projector for providing the augmented games for more than 2 players by combining it with
our polarization-based technology.

Board games
The system can apply to board games. Figure 10 shows
an example of a board game with Demulti Display. In the
game, an experienced third person can help less experienced player in the game by writing a secret message only
visible for him/her in the field. This function is useful when
one of the players is new to the game, and he/she needs
an experienced supporter. Previously, in this situation, the
assistant needs to tell the advice aloud, but sometimes the
other player can hear the message. This reduces the enjoyment in the game. However, Dumlti Display can avoid the
situation since the adviser can just write messages and/or
diagrams in the environment.

Conclusion
Future Work
As the initial phase of the research, we used an LCD under the panel. Thus, the gaming field is quite small. However, the setup can use a projector for a larger gaming field.
In this case, we can use the function works with tangibles
such as Air Hockey and Table tennis. To make the setup
general, we can make gaming API that directly controls the
two monitors for game developers.
Air hockey
Figure 9 shows a future application on Air hockey using a
projector with Demulti Display. For skill-gap mitigation, the
environment can hide the puck from one of the players by
projecting exactly same color as the puck to the gaming
field, or projecting fake pucks which have the same color
and the size randomly in the field. The system uses polarization. Since polarized lights become natural lights when
reflected, we have to put a silver screen on the gaming field
which can sustain the polarization property even after the
reflection. We can also paint the gaming filed by a silver
spray instead of having the screen.

We have introduced the Demulti Display, a panel to configure a multiplayer table gaming environment. The game
can provide appropriate difficulty to each player following
the ability and/or the score of the player. Therefore, the environment would make games enjoyable even if there is a
significant skill gap. We took a polarization-based approach
to providing different images to each player. For the first
trial of the research, we used a liquid crystal display to configure a table gaming field with the Demulti Display. We also
implemented an augmented pong game to adjust the gaming difficulty for each player depending on the score. The
setup can use a projector to provide a larger gaming space.
Therefore, the system can be applied to sports and games
using a 3D space such as Air Hockey and Table Tennis.

Acknowledgements
We thank all authors, and HongoTechGarage in the University of Tokyo for providing me the opportunity to work on
this project.

462

Work in Progress

TEI 2017, March 20–23, 2017, Yokohama, Japan

REFERENCES
1. Kazuhisa uanaka Hisataka suziki, Akihiko shirai. 2016.
Glassless Augmented Display for Public Signage. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Virtual Reality International
Conference. ACM, 23–25.
2. Robin Hunicke. 2005. The case for dynamic difficulty
adjustment in games. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM
SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in
computer entertainment technology. ACM, 429–433.
3. Osamu Izuta, Toshiki Sato, Sachiko Kodama, and
Hideki Koike. 2010. Bouncing Star project: design and
development of augmented sports application using a
ball including electronic and wireless modules. In
Proceedings of the 1st Augmented Human
International Conference. ACM, 22.
4. Yasuaki Kakehi, Makoto Iida, Takeshi Naemura,
Yoshinari Shirai, Mitsunori Matsushita, and Takeshi
Ohguro. 2005. Lumisight table: An interactive
view-dependent tabletop display. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 25, 1 (2005), 48–53.
5. Abhijit Karnik, Diego Martinez Plasencia, Walterio
Mayol-Cuevas, and Sriram Subramanian. 2012. PiVOT:
personalized view-overlays for tabletops. In

Proceedings of the 25th annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology. ACM,
271–280.
6. Diego Martinez Plasencia, Jarrod Knibbe, Andy D
Haslam, Eddie James Latimer, Barnaby Dennis,
Gareth J Lewis, Matthew Whiteley, and David Coyle.
2014. ReflectoSlates: personal overlays for tabletops
combining camera-projector systems and
retroreflective materials. In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
2071–2076.
7. Kei Nitta, Keita Higuchi, and Jun Rekimoto. 2014.
HoverBall: augmented sports with a flying ball. In
Proceedings of the 5th Augmented Human
International Conference. ACM, 13.
8. Hisataka Suzuki, Rex Hsieh, Ryotaro Tsuda, and
Akihiko Shirai. 2015. ExPixel FPGA: multiplex hidden
imagery for HDMI video sources. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2015 Posters. ACM, 71.
9. Penelope Sweetser and Peta Wyeth. 2005. GameFlow:
a model for evaluating player enjoyment in games.
Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 3, 3 (2005), 3–3.

463

