exTouch: Spatially-Aware Embodied Manipulation of
Actuated Objects Mediated by Augmented Reality
Shunichi Kasahara

Ryuma Niiyama

Valentin Heun

Hiroshi Ishii

Sony Corporation
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA

MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
ryuma@media.mit.edu

MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
heun@media.mit.edu

MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
ishii@media.mit.edu

Shunichi.Kasahara@jp.sony.com
ABSTRACT

As domestic robots and smart appliances become
increasingly common, they require a simple, universal
interface to control their motion. Such an interface must
support a simple selection of a connected device, highlight
its capabilities and allow for an intuitive manipulation. We
propose "exTouch", an embodied spatially-aware approach
to touch and control devices through an augmented reality
mediated mobile interface. The "exTouch" system extends
the users touchscreen interactions into the real world by
enabling spatial control over the actuated object. When
users touch a device shown in live video on the screen, they
can change its position and orientation through multi-touch
gestures or by physically moving the screen in relation to
the controlled object. We demonstrate that the system can
be used for applications such as an omnidirectional vehicle,
a drone, and moving furniture for reconfigurable room.
Author Keywords

Tangible interfaces, Direct Manipulation, Embodied
Interactions, Augmented Reality, Spatially Aware Interface
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]: User
Interfaces: Input devices and strategies; H.5.1 [Multimedia
Information Systems]: Artificial, augmented, and virtual
realities; I.3.6 [Methodology and techniques]: Interaction
techniques.
General Terms

Design, Human Factors
INTRODUCTION

Increasingly, smart appliances are widely used in domestic
settings, for instance, networked TV, motorized window
shades and digitally controlled lights. Meanwhile, users
have to adapt to their complicated operation. Moreover, the
growth of robotic technology provides new kinds of
products for the living space such as pan/tilt security
cameras, robotic vacuum cleaners, and robotic lawn
mowers. These products require not only simple on/off
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
TEI 2013, Feb 10-13, 2013, Barcelona, Spain.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1898-3/13/02....$15.00.

Figure 1. exTouch, User can simply touch and drag the target
device through live video on the screen

control but also complicated 3D motion control in space.
These situations led to invent a “universal remote
controller”.
A universal controller using a portable computer (often a
smart phone or tablet) has benefits compared to
conventional switch/button interface. Specifically, it
provides unlimited interaction design by software, control
of unreachable objects, and secure remote operation. On the
other hand, existing universal controllers require
undesirable effort for selecting a target device from
multiple devices and are not well suited for advanced
motion control.
Recent approaches for direct selection of the target device
are based on hand gestures, and laser pointers [1]. Another
approach for device selection is using a touch screen with
camera captured image [2][4]. To provide assistive
guidance for the target device with complicated action and
function, overlay image based on augmented reality
approach is a standard technique [5]. In addition, spatial
interaction with virtual objects overlaid on live video is a
highly discussed issue [6]. However, developing intuitive
interfaces for three-dimensional motion control of physical
objects in real life has been a challenge that has not yet
been solved elegantly from user’s point of view.
To address these issues, we propose the "exTouch" system
(Fig.1). Users can control the physical motion of a target

device by simply touching and dragging through firstperson live view video on the screen. The system is based
on a portable computer with built-in camera, and does not
require external equipment like large-scale motion capture
system or ceiling cameras. We demonstrate that the system
is applicable for smart devices such as an omnidirectional
vehicle, a drone, and moving furniture.
RELATED WORK

There have been several studies for intuitive interface to
control objects in living space. Laser Gesture [1] is a
system for operating mobile robots by using a laser pointer
and ceiling camera for detecting pointer. It is convenient
but not applicable for complex motion and also faces laser
safety issues.
Another promising approach uses camera captured images
on a touch screen. The idea of controlling devices through a
video image was introduced by Tani et al. [2] in the project
Object Oriented Video. Users can manipulate digital
functions through the captured video. CRISTAL [4] is a
system for manipulating home electronics in the room via
tabletop multi-touch interface that uses perspective image
of the room. For physical motion control, TouchMe [3] is a
system for tele-operating a mobile robot through a touch
panel. These approaches provide real-time visual feedback
and intuitive touch interaction. However, they require the
user to consider the spatial relation between miniature
world in the monitor and the real world as reading a scale
map.
SPATIALLY-AWARE INTERACTION

We present a concept of "spatially-aware interaction" to
transfer the benefits of direct manipulation to the touch
screen interface. The spatially-aware interaction satisfies
the following features; 1) user-egocentric manipulation, and
2) spatially consistent relation between virtual world and

Figure 2. Spatial projection of the user touch input into the
target motion

real world. The user-centered manipulation means that the
action of target object is always described in the user’s
coordinate system independent from the object posture. In
contrast, conventional gamepad/joystick sends a command
based on object’s coordinate system. Spatial consistency
represents that a camera captured image represents on the
control interface always corresponds to the real world, in
terms of position, orientation, and scale. For example, when
a tourist reads a scale map and walks, the tourist has to
consider the conversion of direction, standing, and scale. In
the spatially-aware interaction, the virtual world on the
screen emulates user’s egocentric view in real time.
EXTOUCH
User interaction

The exTouch is a system for motion control of actuated
objects based on spatially-aware interaction mediated by
augmented reality. A user holds the mobile device with a
touch screen and back-mounted camera, and points it at the
target object. Once the object comes into the range of the

Table 1. exTouch Interaction for motion control. Users can change the position and rotation through multi-touch gestures or
by physically moving the mobile device spatially.

camera, superimposed virtual graphics are rendered on the
captured image based on AR approach. Users can control
the target objects by dragging the superimposed graphics
with multi-touch gestures on the screen or by physically
moving the device. Then the physical object moves to
match the location of the on-screen graphics. User can see
the results through the live video on the screen.
Implementation overview

The exTouch system employs augmented reality
recognition technology to obtain a three-dimensional pose
matrix (homogeneous transformation matrix), which
describes the position and orientation of the target object in
relation to the screen. The system allows spatial projection
of the user input into the target motion by using egocentric
live image from back-mounted camera and touch screen
(Fig. 2). The system performs visual servo control to make
the physical object closer to a desired position by using the
difference between the recognized object position and
dragged virtual graphics position.
Motion Control Interaction

The fundamental metaphor used in “exTouch” for remote
motion control of physical objects is “touch and drag.”
Users can change the position and rotation of the target
object through two types of touch and drag interaction. For
convenience, we call these “screen drag” and “physical
drag” to describe these gestural grammar (Table 1).
When a user touches the screen, a control plane
corresponding to the object movements is determined based
on the touch points. Once the control plane is determined,
touch points are projected into the recognized coordinate
system based on the pose matrix of the control plane and
the camera parameters. Finger motion on the touch screen
and physical movement of the device while touching both
turn out to be a motion of projected point on the control
plane. Therefore, both screen drag and physical drag
interactions can be used simultaneously.
Screen Drag

Users can use gestures with one or two fingers on the touch
screen. For translational motion, user can control planar
motion by one-finger drag, which implies an impression
that the finger is generating a force to move the object. For
vertical motion user can use two-finger pinch in/out gesture
which is based on the metaphor that the object looks larger
when it’s closer. For rotation, user can control roll axis by
two-finger rotation gesture, which is well known multitouch gesture in touch screen device, and user can control
pitch/yaw axes by two-finger drag gesture. This design
resolves the ambitiousness of translation motion and
rotation motion by assigning one-finger and two-finger
gesture.
Physical Drag

Physical movement of the device while touching the screen
also results in movements of the projective point on the
control plane as well as the screen drag. This feature allows
user to control translational and rotational motion by

Figure 3. Virtual graphics show the virtual destination subject
to motion constraints. Left; planar translational motion,
Right; one axis rotation.

Figure 4. Visual servoing process. Motion control signal for
the actuated object is generated from the difference between
the recognized object position and dragged virtual graphics
position

physically moving the mobile device while touching the
object on the screen. This interaction provides the metaphor
that a finger fixes the spatial relationship between the object
and the finger.
Graphic motion affordance

When objects are recognized from the camera image,
prompting graphics are overlaid on the camera-captured
image in real time. Moreover, once the specific control
plane is determined, assistive graphics are rendered to
indicate the motion constraints of the object (Fig. 3).
These guide graphics also show the virtual destination of
the object in real-time. This allows users to confirm where
the target object is going to move in the real world. In our
current implementation, when user releases his/her finger,
the virtual destination moves back toward the current
position and orientation of the object with animated
transition.
Visual Servoing

To achieve a desired position and orientation designated by
user, the system performs visual servo control (Fig. 4). The
pose difference is calculated from the current pose matrix
of the object and the target pose matrix. The pose difference
is mapped into control command and sent to the selected
object.
APPLICATION

We implemented the exTouch system with several different
actuated objects to understand its real world performance.
In order to explore the effectiveness of the exTouch’s
interaction design, devices with various degrees of freedom
of movements were chosen, omnidirectional vehicle, a
drone, and moving furniture.

We employ image based AR recognition technology
(Vuforia™ [7]) which recognizes a natural image as a target
planar object with registered dictionary data. Our prototype
system composed of the mobile application running on an
Apple iPad 2, and actuated objects connected via wireless
network.
Omni directional robot

Wheeled mobile robots are the most popular form of robots
in office and home use. We built an omnidirectional mobile
robot to simulate practical robots such as cleaner robot, and
tele-presence robot. The robot has two degrees of freedoms
(DoF) for planar translation and 1 DoF for rotation about a
vertical axis (Fig 1).
Flying drone control

Control of an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), commonly
known as a drone, is an emerging field. The hovering flight
of a quadcopter drone is suited to carrying instrument such
as flying video/photo shooting. Our mini quadcopter has
3DoF for translation and 1DoF for yaw rotation (Fig 5-a).
Transformable furniture control

Transformable furniture is a novel approach to utilize
robotics technology in future homes. We used motorized
1DoF motorized wall/rack for the test (Fig 5-b).
DISCUSSION

The drag metaphor is used to command an absolute target
position through the touch screen. While the physical object
cannot pursue the target as quick as user gesture due to the
limitation of motion control, the superimposed virtual
graphic greatly helps to buffer this issue.
In our system, the control signal is determined based on
visual servo control so that the target object approaches an
absolute target position from the user’s point of view. Thus
the user does not need to consider the position difference or
control command.
One of advantage of the exTouch gesture design is that
screen drag and physical drag are not exclusive, and can be
performed simultaneously. This enables continuous
interaction with limited size screen of mobile devices.
The prototype application suggests the necessity of further
evaluation of the user's cognitive load regarding spatial
perception. Especially, the manipulation from free angle by
using proposed system should be assessed as compared
with fixed camera system. Validating usability of the
system at sight with inexperienced users is another issue.
CONCLUSION

We introduced "exTouch", a spatially-aware approach to
control devices through an augmented reality mediated
mobile interface. The system allows spatial projection of
the user input into the target motion by using egocentric
camera captured image and multi-touch gesture. User can
perform both screen drags (move finger on the screen) and

(a)

(b)
Figure 5. Application example. Flying drone (a),
Transformable furniture (b).

physical drags (fix finger and move the screen physically)
simultaneously. This feature allows embodied continual
interaction not limited by the screen size. The preliminary
exploration on the control of omnidirectional vehicle, a
drone, and motorized furniture show the potential
effectiveness on various types of actuated objects.
We achieved spatial extension of touch screen interaction
through spatially-aware approach by augmented reality. We
envision that proposed spatially-aware interaction provide
further enhancement of human physical ability through
spatial extension of user interaction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Kent Larson and Hasier Larrea for their help with
moving wall system and discussions about human home
interaction.
REFERENCES

1. Ishii, K., Zhao, S., Inami, M., Igarashi, T., and Imai, M.,
Designing Laser Gesture Interface for Robot Control. In
Proc INTERACT 2009, Part 2, pp.479-492.
2. Tani, M., Yamaashi, K., Tanikoshi, K., Futakawa, M.,
and Tanifuji, S. Object-oriented video: interaction with
real-world objects through live video. In Proc. CHI
1992, pp. 593-598.
3. Hashimoto, S., Ishida, A., Inami, M., and Igarashi, T.
TouchMe: An Augmented Reality Based Remote Robot
Manipulation. The 21st International Conference on
Artificial Reality and Telexistence, Proceedings of
ICAT2011.
4. Seifried, T., Haller, M., Scott,S., Perteneder, F., Rendl,
C., Sakamoto, D., and Inami, M. CRISTAL: Design and
Implementation of a Remote Control System Based on a
Multi-touch Display. In Proc. ITS2009, pp. 37-44.
5. D. W. F. van Krevelen, R. Poelman. A Survey of
Augmented Reality Technologies, Applications and
Limitations. The International Journal of Virtual
Reality, 2010 Vol. 9, No. 2., pp. 1-20.
6. Bimber, O., Raskar, R. Spatial Augmented Reality:
Merging Real and Virtual Worlds. A K Peters, Ltd,
Wellesley, Massachusetts. Retrieved December 1, 2010.
7. Qualcomm , VuforiaTM :
http://www.qualcomm.com/solutions/augmented-reality

