HoverBall: Augmented Sports with a Flying Ball
Kei Nitta
The University of Tokyo
keinitta74@gmail.com

Keita Higuchi
The University of Tokyo
The Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science
khiguchi@acm.org

Jun Rekimoto
The University of Tokyo
Sony Computer Science
Laboratory
rekimoto@acm.org

ABSTRACT

Balls are the most popular equipment for sports. To play
with balls, certain physical methods, or “vocabularies,”
such as throwing, hitting, spinning, or kicking have been
developed by reflecting the fact that balls obey physical
dynamics. This feature forms the foundation of ball-based
sports; however, we consider that it limits the possibility of
such sports. For instance, the speed of balls could be
considerably fast for small children, senior people, or
people with physical disabilities. In this paper, we propose
a flying ball based on quadcopter technology. This ball has
the ability hover and to change its location and behavior
based on the context of the sport or game. With this
technology, the physical dynamics of a ball can be reprogrammed by sports designers, and new ball-playing
vocabularies, such as hovering, anti-gravity, proximity, or
remote manipulation, can be introduced to extend the
method in which people interact with balls. In this paper,
we introduce this concept as a method of augmenting sports,
and present our initial flying ball system that consists of a
grid shell that comprises a micro quadcopter, and
demonstrates new sports interactions with the ball.
Author Keywords

Augmented Sports; Interaction device; Ball; Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation: User
Interfaces: Interaction styles.
INTRODUCTION

Information technology and electronics are used in the field
of sports, such as instant replay and electronic referee.
Conventionally, there has been much effort to introduce
technology to sports watching, training, and judging
(refereeing), but not to sports themselves From late 1990s,
some researchers have proposed extended sports by
augmenting field and sports equipment using information
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
AH '14, March 07 - 09 2014, Kobe, Japan
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2761-9/14/03…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2582051.2582064

Figure 1: Playing with a HoverBall
technologies and electronic devices [6]. The augmentation
of sports is intended to intervene actively in the game itself
using information technology and electronics, with the goal
of contributing to the realization of a new method of
enjoying sports. For example, in table tennis, adding visual
images and sound effects when the ball bounces on the
table has allowed for the realization of highly entertainment
games. In our research, we call these sports “augmented
sports.” For types of sports that use digital technology,
electronic sports (e-sports) in video games are already
known. In some games, such as action games, the ability to
manipulate precise reflexes and high quality physical
abilities similar to that of the sport is required during play.
On the other hand, augmented sports are an extension to the
base of conventional sports.
In the field of augmented sports, there are many studies that
have focused on the advancement of the ball. Balls are the
most widespread sports equipment and are also used in
many entertainment activities, such as juggling. With
technological improvements in the digital field, many
studies have been conducted to enhance balls. For instance,
balls with visual effects [7] and acoustic effects [6] have
been developed. In addition, a ball with multiple cameras
was developed for capturing sports scenes from the
viewpoint of the ball [10]. However, these balls still obey
physical dynamics, and the actual behavior of the balls
remains unchanged. For instance, a part of the body must
remain in contact with a ball in order to control it, and it is
not possible for players to interfere in the motion when they
move their hands away. Therefore, non-skilled players
frequently have difficulty controlling the ball accurately.
Moreover, it is difficult to institute a handicap to adjust the
game balance when a match is performed between nonskilled and skilled players.

To address these problems, we propose a new ball device
with flying ability based on quadcopter technology. This
ball can hover and stay in the air, change its location, and
change its trajectory and behavior during play. We consider
that these features can be used to extend the possibility of
ball games. Mueller et al. indicated that the framework of
sports can be divided into a “four lens view” [8], where the
four lenses are The Responding Body, The Moving Body,
The Sensing Body, and The Relating Body. The
Responding Body is a view of the body’s internal state
changes, such as heart rate. The Moving Body focuses on
the players’ muscular repositioning of body parts. The
Sensing Body is how the body senses and experiences the
world. Finally, The Relating Body encompasses the ways in
which bodies and people relate to one another for social
facilitation. In this framework, our research changes The
Sensing Body to The Affecting Body by adding technology
to a ball (Figure 2). Traditional ball games have been
developed based on the fact that the ball obeys physical
dynamics, and have used interaction methods (or interaction
“vocabularies”) such as throwing, hitting, or kicking. In
contrast, sports games with our ball might not be restricted
to physical dynamics, and can introduce other types of
interaction vocabularies, such as hovering, proximity, weak
or anti-gravity, and (remote) pushing or towing.
The Relating Body
The Sensing Body
The Affecting Body
The Moving Body
The Responding Body

Figure 2: Four-lens view of sports
As a result, we expect that we could design new types of
sports where non-expert or physically disabled players can
interact with balls. We might also be able to realize new
types of competitions where novice and expert players can
compete seriously, because the ball behavior compensates
the difference in abilities.
A BALL WITH FLYING ABILITY

There are many types of sports in the world. Among them,
there are many sports that use the ball in particular and are
enjoyed by a large number of people. However, there are
several problems with such sports, as follows:
•

It is difficult to establish an even game among players
with vast differences in skill.

•

The cost for learning to control a ball precisely is high.

To solve these problems, HoverBall extends the area where
players can interfere with the trajectory and speed. The
trajectories of conventional balls are determined by
aerodynamics and gravity. By providing autonomous

mobility to the ball itself, it is possible to program and add
new artificial physical laws; we refer to such laws as
“imaginary dynamics.” Augugliaro et al. indicated that
admittance control allows users to define the apparent
inertia, damping, and stiffness of robots, thus providing an
intuitive way to physically interact with robots [1]. We aim
to develop a ball with flying ability by adding imaginary
dynamics. By introducing this ball, our goal is to create a
new sport with a HoveBall, and set an ideal handicap match
between unskilled and skilled players by augmentation of
player skill. There are several considerable advantages of
using floating balls.
To facilitate ball control

In sports such as baseball, a skilled player can throw a
trajectory-changing curve ball by rotating a ball. The
existence of a breaking ball will be closely related to the
results of the competition, because tactics are required to
detect quickly the type of breaking ball in order to identify
the trajectory of the opponent. However, to master a
breaking ball is extremely difficult. When a non-expert and
an expert player engage in a match, it becomes necessary to
appropriately adjust the score, or a physical altercation
might ensue, with the result that the game might be
interrupted and not reach a climax, which is an extremely
important element in enjoying sport games. The ball
invented by us allows for an improvement in the
weaknesses of players’ abilities by adjusting the velocity of
the pitch and correcting the trajectory of the ball. As a result,
each player can perform at his best, and an exciting game is
realized.
Designing new sports

Sports and training using a floating ball often appear in the
world of science fiction (SF) and fantasy, for example, Star
Wars, filmed by George Lucas, and the Harry Potter series,
written by J. K. Rowling. As these examples demonstrate,
by unleashing the trajectory of the ball from the
conventional physical laws, the manner in which players
and balls interact becomes rich, and more strategic games
can be designed. For example, a ball can float and slide in
the air similar to the hockey puck on ice, dodge an object
and another player, and return to the player who throws it
(Figure 3). These functions allow a player to pass the ball to
a team member positioned far away in order to avoid an
opposing player. Such functions could be set up to be
limited, or only available for non-expert players. Moreover,
these functions realize the tactics of The Affecting Body
space. If the ability of HoverBall to auto-tune skills can
result in sport games that are more independent from the
players’ physical strength, the strategic component of these
games can become more important. Therefore, anyone from
children to the elderly could participate in games equally,
thus allowing more and varied participants to enjoy games
as lifelong sports. In addition, it can be used as a tool for
the rehabilitation of people with disabilities. Moreover,
HoverBall can be used to support the exercise of children
and the elderly by “traction” and “proximity.”

Gliding
Dodging

hover. Baudisch et al. invented the imaginary Reality
gaming [2]. This is a ball game similar to basketball, but
without a ball. Players engage in the game with voice
feedback, such as “who has the imaginary ball,” “judgment
of the goal,” “which is the state of the imaginary ball, inside
or outside of the game field.” This game is executed upon
common understanding. Therefore, it is difficult to import
the game to imaginary dynamics that were never seen.
Interaction with UAVs

Boomerang
Proximity

Figure 3: Interaction example with HoverBall
RELATED WORK

In many new sports, tools are added to the tool used in the
conventional sports. For example, bossaball is similar to
volleyball, but bossaball uses an inflatable court with
integrated trampolines on each side of the net, allowing
players to bounce sufficiently high to spike the ball and add
great spectacularity. Bubble football is a soccer game in
which players compete inside giant bubbles. The game has
14 players encased in a zorb-like inflatable bubble; the
players are encouraged to bounce into each other as they
fight for possession of the ball.
Augmented ball sports

Some people engage in augmented sports with the use of
projectors, acceleration sensors, and so on. Ishii et al.
developed PingPongPlus [6], which is an athletic-tangible
interface. The interface is a Ping-Pong table that includes
eight microphones and a video projector; the player can
enjoy dynamic graphics and audio generated by soundbased ball tracking technology. Shootball, an original sport
developed by Sugano et al., is a goal-based ball game
played in a field surrounded by four screens linked to each
other [11]. The ball used in this sport contains an embedded
wireless shock sensor. The player throws the ball to a goal
area projected on the screen in order to earn points. Mueller
et al. developed a game that enables communication and
play between multiple players in different locations. Using
a wall screen, camera, and projector, players break blocks
projected onto a screen, either cooperating with other
players, or competing for the highest score [9]. The game
uses a wall screen, a camera and a projector, and players
break blocks that are projected on the screen in concert with
other players, or compete for score. Izuta et al. created a
ball for augmented sports, called Bouncing Star [7].
Because the ball has a wireless module, acceleration sensor,
sound sensor, infrared LEDs, and is observed by a camera,
this system can recognize the ball’s motion and track its
position. When the ball bounces or rolls on the field, the
projected computer graphics, color LEDs inside the ball,
and responsive sounds are all synchronized with the ball’s
state of motion. Ichikwa et al. invented a ball-type motion
control device [5]. It is composed of a ball and an airpressure tank to change its vector using gas ejection. This
device is able to reappear a breaking ball, however, cannot

Some researchers use unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in
entertainment, sports training, and so on. Higuchi et al.
developed a sports training system using UAVs [4]. In this
system, the UAV which mounted a camera tracks a user,
and represents his external vision through a head mounted
display. Graether et al. developed a jogging support system
called joggobot [3]. The system accompanies a runner in
order to motivate his exertion activities. These systems
support players in recognizing and correcting their
technique.
PROTOTYPE

The prototype system introduces a ball shaped microquadcopter and a motion capture system. The system uses
Crazyflie Nano Quadcopter, which is the hand-size
quadcopter (Table 1). We make a Styrofoam grid shell (16
cm) as a spherical exterior component, and put the
quadcopter into its central part. The motion capture system
measures three-dimensional position (x, y, and z) and
orientation (pitch, roll, and yaw) to an accuracy of 1mm.
Optitrack S250e as a motion capture camera can track
retroreflection makers in 120 fps. We attach three makers
on the exterior component. If we use a sufficient number of
cameras, the system can measure the size of a tennis court.
The player’s position is also perceived; therefore, the
trajectory of the ball is programmable, depending on the
position between the players and the ball.
Size:
Flight Time:

90 * 90 mm

Payload:

10g

5min

Sensor:

3-axis gyro +
3axis accelerometer

Table 1: Specifications of the Crazyflie Nano Quadcopter

Figure 4: An overview and prototype of HoverBall
Figure 4 shows the experimental environment and the ballshaped quadcopter At first, we tested the stability of
hovering. The method for controlling the quadcopter uses a
proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller that
responds to position data from the motion capture cameras.
Figure 5 is a graph of altitude data.

REFERENCES

1. Augugliaro, F., D’Andrea, R. Admittance Control for
Physical Human-Quadrocopter Interaction. Published
in: Control Conference (ECC), European (2013) 18051810
Figure 5: HoverBall altitude
Finally, we developed some basic interactions, such as
“Hover & Glide” and “Boomerang.” In these interactions,
hand gesture is used to control the HoverBall, and a user
can manipulate it once it is in the air. (Figure 6)

Hover & Glide

Boomerang
Figure 6: Image of Hover and Glide / Boomerang. When
a player raises a hand, the ball floats up. When a player
beckons, the ball returns to the player.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we presented a flying ball device for
augmenting sports. This device adopts imaginary dynamics
to ball sports. The device makes interaction possible
between a ball and a distant body. By extending the area in
which a player can affect the ball, controlling the ball
becomes easier, and the possibility for designing a new
sport is realized. We developed a prototype system with a
micro quadcopter surrounded by a spherical grid, and
showed new interactions with players.
In our current implementation, we used Crazyflie Nano
Quadcopter because of its small size, which can be
embedded in a ball. However, the ball’s payload is
considerably limited, and it is difficult to support a
spherical grid with sufficient strength to be used in sports.
Thus, with the current implementation, we mainly explore
non-contact interactions, such as maintaining proximity or
remote manipulation. However, for use in sports, we expect
the ball to frequently receive a strong impact by being hit
and kicked. In order to design a ball with enough durability
against such physical impact, more research is required.
One possibility is to use a helicopter with a higher payload
to support a stronger spherical surface. Another possibility
is to use a more flexible material that can recover its shape
after receiving an impact. The device also requires more
power and a higher response control system. When players
throw, this ball rotates severely. To control altitude, the ball
requires higher thrust power. We plan to introduce powerful
rotors. Second, because most radio control helicopters have
no large capacity battery to fly for a long time, the
helicopters should switch their thrusters to standby mode to
save battery when a player is holding it.

2. Baudisch, P., Henning, P., Reinicke, S., Wittmers, E.,
Lühne, P., Knaust, M., Köhler, S., Schmidt, P. and
Holz,. Imaginary reality gaming: ball games without a
ball. Proceeding UIST '13 Proceedings of the 26th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and
technology, 405-410.
3. Graether, E., Mueller, F. Joggobot: a flying robot as
jogging companion. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
annual conference extended abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts,
CHIEA’12, (2012), 1063-1066.
4. Higuchi, K., Shimada, T. and J. Rekimoto. Flying sports
assistant: external visual imagery representation for
sports training. In Proceedings of the 2nd Augmented
Human International Conference, page 7. ACM, 2011.
5. Ichikawa, T., Nojima, T. Development of the motioncontrollable ball. Adjunct proceedings of the 23nd
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and
technology, (2010), 425-426.
6. Ishii, H., Wisneski, C., Orbanes, J., Chun, B., Paradiso,
J. PingPongPlus: design of an athletic-tangible interface
for computer-supported cooperative play. Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (1999), 394-401.
7. Izuta, O., Sato, T., Kodama, S., Koike, H. Bouncing Star
project: design and development of augmented sports
application using a ball including electronic and wireless
modules. Proceedings of the 1st Augmented Human
International Conference (2010), Article No.22.
8. Mueller, F., Edge, D., Vetere, F., Gibbs, M.,
Agamanolis, S., Bongers, B., Sheridan, J. Designing
Sports: A Framework for Exertion Games. CHI '11
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems Pages 2651-2660
9. Mueller, F., Gibbs M. Evaluating a distributed physical
leisure game for three players. Proceedings of the 19th
Australasian conference on Computer-Human
Interaction: Entertaining User Interfaces (2007), 143150.
10. Pfeil, J., Hildebrand, K., Gremzow, C., Bickel, B.,
Alexa, M. Throwable panoramic ball camera.
Proceeding SA '11 SIGGRAPH Asia 2011 Emerging
Technologies (2011), Article No. 4
11. Sugano, Y., Mochizuki, Y., Usui, T., Okude, N.
Shootball: the ball sport using dynamic goals.
Proceedings of the international conference on
Advances in computer entertainment technology (2007),
262-263.

