Pixie Dust: Graphics Generated by Levitated and Animated Objects in
Computational Acoustic-Potential Field
Yoichi Ochiai∗

Takayuki Hoshi

Jun Rekimoto

Figure 1: Application images of Pixie Dust, levitated and manipulated objects in graphic metaphors. (a) Floating screen with projection
(SIGGRAPH logo). (b) Acoustic Potential Field Generator overview. (c) Physical vector graphics (heart). (d) Physical raster graphics (A).

1

Introduction

In this study, we demonstrate real-world-oriented computer graphics by using and expanding 3D acoustic manipulation [Ochiai et al.
2014]. An acoustic potential field (APF) is generated and controlled
in order to levitate and manipulate small objects (Fig. 2 (a)). Compared to magnetic levitation, air jets, and other noncontact levitation
technologies, our technology has the following advantages: a wide
variety of materials are available; it provides a satisfactory refresh
rate; and it has a sufficient spatial resolution. It would contributes to
the computer graphics community by making the levitated objects
usable in graphic metaphors such as the pixels of raster graphics,
moving points of vector graphics, and animation (Fig. 1). We believe that it will open a new field of computer graphics if fabricated
models can be actuated by APF.

2

Related Work

There have been several studies on manipulation using ultrasonic
waves. Ultra-Tangibles [Marshall et al. 2012] utilized the acoustic radiation pressure of traveling waves from the surrounding
ultrasonic-phased arrays. Acoustophoretic transport [Foresti et al.
2013] and lapillus bug [Kono et al. 2013] move the object along a
2D plane with standing waves (Fig. 2 (b)). The extended acoustic manipulation [Ochiai et al. 2014] moves objects in a 3D space
with opposite phased arrays. Additionally, an expanded acoustic
manipulation is developed in this study.

3

Application

Floating Projection Screen: Figure 1 (a) shows a floating screen
with 2D-grid APF suspending small particles in all the nodes. The
APF forming this screen has a high refresh rate and a high spatial
resolution. In our current prototype, the maximum control rate of
spatial position is 1 kHz, the distance between the particles is 4.25
mm, and 85 × 85 particles are suspended at the maximum.
Physical Vector Graphics: A vector graphics display (Fig. 1 (c))
is achieved based on persistence of vision by moving particles at
high speed. The trajectories are designed as a series of coordinates,
∗ email:

ochyai@me.com, The University of Tokyo

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the
first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all
other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
SIGGRAPH 2014, August 10 – 14, 2014, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
2014 Copyright held by the Owner/Author.
ACM 978-1-4503-2961-3/14/08

Figure 2: (a) Concept of computational potential field. (b) Differences in acoustic manipulation approaches.
which are set up to 1000 points per second. According to the experiments, the maximum speed of movement was 72 cm/s.
Physical Raster Graphics: Figure 1 (d) shows a raster graphics display. First, APF suspends small particles in all the nodes. Next, the
system adequately blows off some of the particles and generates a
raster image. This process is operated by an additional phased array
or air jet.

References
F ORESTI , D., NABAVI , M., K LINGAUF, M., F ERRARI , A., AND
P OULIKAKOS , D. 2013. Acoustophoretic contactless transport and handling of matter in air. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.
KONO , M., K AKEHI , Y., AND H OSHI , T., 2013. lapillus bug.
SIGGRAPH Asia 2013 Art Gallery.
M ARSHALL , M., C ARTER , T., A LEXANDER , J., AND S UBRA MANIAN , S. 2012. Ultra-tangibles: Creating movable tangible
objects on interactive tables. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New
York, NY, USA, CHI ’12, 2185–2188.
O CHIAI , Y., H OSHI , T., AND R EKIMOTO , J. 2014. Threedimensional mid-air acoustic manipulation by ultrasonic phased
arrays. PLoS ONE 9, 5, e97590.

