Intentiō: Power Distribution through a Potentialized Human
Body
Michinari Kono

Hiromi Nakamura

Jun Rekimoto

The University of Tokyo
JSPS Research Fellow
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, Japan

The University of Tokyo
JSPS Research Fellow
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, Japan

mkono
@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

hirominakamura.b
@gmail.com

The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, Japan
Sony CSL
3-14-13 Higashigotanda,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, Japan

rekimoto@acm.org

Figure 1: Intentiō and its applications: (a) Intentiō enables users to distribute power to electronic devices from power passing through
their body. (b) Electronic and IoT devices are activated and powered by power distributed from the user. (c) Electronic stuffed toy
activated by the user. The LED eyes emit light when the user touches the toy. (d) The user can adjust the amount of power distributed
to the target device. Here, the volume of an electric music box is being adjusted.

ABSTRACT
We present Intentiō, which allows a potentialized human body to
activate low-power electronic devices by touching them. A potentialized human body, i.e., one carrying our device, acts as a
common power source and distributes power to electronic devices
through their body. An electronic device generally requires its own
power source that needs to be managed individually. The diversity of battery sources, which must also be frequently charged or
exchanged, has introduced complications for users who manage
them. Providing a common power source may help users more easily manage electric devices because the devices are passive, with
no power source of their own. This paper presents Intentiō’s design
and implementation, followed by several proof-of-concept applications based on a potentialized human body. We also discuss the
safety concerns of our method. Intentiō is a concept and framework for augmenting humans so that they may interact with and
handle electronic devices with power distribution, where the elecPermission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

AH ’17, March 16-18, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA
c 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4835-5/17/03. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3041164.3041175

tric devices can passively exist without complex wiring or power
sources.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction
(HCI); HCI theory, concepts and models; Ubiquitous and mobile
computing; Ubiquitous and mobile computing systems and tools;

Keywords
Power Distribution, Passive Activation, Potentialized Human Body,
Low-Power Electronics, Human-Centered Interaction, Augmented
Human.

1.

INTRODUCTION

A power supply has always been an inevitable element of electric
and electronic devices [10, 15]. Many low-power electric devices
at home are powered by batteries, e.g., remote controllers, electric
toys, and various types of tools. However, using batteries is not
always beneficial to the user, since batteries come in a variety of
sizes and standards, which makes it difficult for users to find the
right type when replacing one.
Although power supplies still have significant issues, an increasing number of electronic devices are becoming popular because of
the development and spread of the Internet of Things (IoT) and
ubiquitous computing. This also results in an increase of battery

power supplies or corded connections to commercial power supplies. Rechargeable batteries are now common for these types of
electronic devices; however, they still need to be recharged frequently. Furthermore, lines connected to external power sources
may disturb a user’s activity or even conflict with other devices because of a limited number of power outlets.
As electric devices have multiplied, their power consumption has
decreased. Low-power electronic components, including semiconductors, sensors, and microcontrollers, only consume a few microwatts. As the demands of electronic devices increase, their power
requirements will continue to decrease. This will enable the supply of power through various methods, not simply with batteries
or commercial power. Moreover, it may also enable devices to become smaller, as the power source is placed outside the device,
enabling them to exist passively.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of human-centered interaction based on power distribution through the human body (Figure 1). We present a method for distributing power to low-power
electric devices using a common power source. The system enables a user to carry a common power source on his/her body that
distributes power by interacting with electronic devices that have
no power sources of their own. It is obvious that many low-power
electric devices will require interaction from the user in order to
activate.
Some researchers have explored battery-free user interfaces that
source their power from the physical effort involved or required
when interacting with them [6, 45, 2]. These are methods for harvesting energy; however, in this work, instead of harvesting the
power, we use power sources existing and held on the body. We
always carry some kind of power source, and it is now common,
and possibly indispensable, to have smart devices or other wearables (smartphones, smartwatches, or even mobile batteries) with
us. We focus on obtaining a radical power source from these devices and supply the power to the target devices via a human-body
interaction.
To allow the power to safely travel through the user, a highvoltage power source oscillates at a high frequency. The target
devices have simple rectifying and regulating circuits, need no internal power source, and therefore remain passive.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.
• We have developed a wearable power source for powering
low-power electric devices. The power is supplied through
the human body and its interactions; therefore, the electric
devices need no internal power sources and remain passive.
• We clarify the safety concerns for using our system and designed the device based on observing electricity passing safely
through a human body.
• We present several example applications and scenarios to
prove our concept and its feasibility. We show examples of
powering electronic devices and paper crafts/cards, as well
as interactions between multiple users, and discuss further
possibilities for Intentiō.

2.

POWER DISTRIBUTION THROUGH A
HUMAN BODY

In this section, we present an overview of Intentiō and its operating principles (Figure 2). The words high-voltage and highfrequency are generally used for voltage over 600 V and signals
around RF (radio frequency), however, in this paper, note that we
use the words high-voltage and high-frequency for voltage above

Figure 2: Principle of operation. The wearable device converts
the original input, which is supplied to the user, to an appropriate power. The user distributes the power by touching the
target device, which rectifies and regulates the signal for its activation.

100 V and frequency of around 10–100 kHz to address the difference from requirements of small electronic devices, commercial
power supplies (100–250 V, 50–60 Hz), and other research based
on signals up to 1 kHz [3, 4]. Power distribution to passive electronic devices through a human body is accomplished through the
following steps.
1. High-voltage and high-frequency AC power is applied to the
body through a wearable device that potentializes the user.
2. The potentialized user touches the target electronic device,
and power is supplied to the device by electricity passing
through the user’s body.
3. The AC signal received from the user is rectified. The rectified signal is regulated to an appropriate value to activate the
device or is otherwise left as a fluctuating signal controllable
by the user.
The wearable device that supplies power to the body is powered
by a smart device or an external power source. It consists of a
transformer that boosts the voltage to a few hundred volts and oscillates the signal at a few thousand hertz. Since the human body is
not completely safe when conducting electricity, it was necessary
to consider the system’s values carefully. We provide a detailed
discussion of the safety concerns in the next section, including the
reason such high-frequency signals were used. The body acts as a
power cable and can supply power to devices by touching or holding them. It is necessary for a user to touch the devices with his/her
hands. The activated target device requires no power sources, e.g.,
batteries or corded connections from power supplies. Instead, it
requires a simple electric circuit that will rectify and regulate the
power supplied by the potentialized user. The idea is to use a common power source and have each device adjust the power for its
own required values. This will help users to more easily manage such devices because they exist passively and can be activated
through a single common power source.

3.

SAFETY

The human body is not completely safe when conducting electricity; therefore, we must consider safety issues in our work. Although many researchers have attempted to electrify humans and

Figure 3: Intentiō system: (a) The design and size of the wearable device. (b) The wearable device is worn on the wrist, belt, ankle,
or inside a shoe. (c) An example design of the receiving circuit. The size is not fixed, and can be designed to be the same shape as a
coin cell.

have discussed safety concerns in the human–computer interaction
field, our purpose differs and we consider using a larger amount of
current. This may decrease its acceptability with users; thus, we
must address this issue.

3.1

Current and Frequency Conditions

According to the IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission) [12], when considering electric shock, the important element
is the amount of current passing through the body. For a 15–100
Hz AC signal (including commercial power supplies), humans do
not perceive less than 0.5 mA of electricity. Further, up to 10 mA
of electricity does not pose a serious risk to humans. However,
although they may be safe, currents from 0.5 to 10 mA are perceptible and are quite uncomfortable to experience. These current
levels are inappropriate. REVEL [3] is a prior related study that
limited its current to 150 µA.
However, the perception current changes depending on the frequency conditions. According to Dalziel [7], the perception current
decreases at higher frequencies. Therefore, to design a system that
can carry a larger amount of current through the body, we must use
higher frequency AC signals.
We know that using high-frequency AC signals will be better for
the usability of our system; however, this does not mean that higher
frequencies are always better. High-frequency signals will not be
perceived by a human; however, they carry the risk of heat generation [40]. Another concern is that the current perception threshold changes depending on the condition of a human body (e.g.,
sweat level, weight, gender, or the route the current takes through
the body). Therefore, we must design an offset value that can be
adapted for these elements. Dalziel reported that the perception
of current is more than 10 mA at 30 kHz. We use this value and
describe our actual design in the implementation section.

3.2

Voltage

The main threat that causes electric shocks to the human body
is the amount of current. However, using high-voltage power may
cause electrical discharge on the skin that may be painful and burn.
This can occur when a high-voltage electrode is held close to the
skin with a small gap. Turning on the power after attaching the
electrode to the skin will prevent this risk, which we assume for
our system. Considering that the electrode could be accidentally
detached from the skin, we avoid using extremely high-voltage and
use 250 V power. We refer to a report that mentions the stimulus
is perceived at voltages above 330 V [34]. However, some stimuli
were perceived even at 250 V when the electrode was weakly con-

nected to the skin. Therefore, we must take care that the electrode
is not detached when activated.

3.3

Continious Usage

As our system is for continuous use, we must carefully discuss
safety in such conditions. The main risk of continuous usage of
high-frequency power is heating. For example, high-power and
high-frequency current is used for electrosurgery [41]. However,
this phenomenon is usually considered to occur for frequencies
over 100 kHz, and studies report that no established effects are
found at lower frequencies [40, 41, 13]. Nevertheless, in these papers, it is also mentioned that further studies are required and the
effects of long-term usage are unknown. Therefore, we must still be
careful when using our system continuously, and further research
is necessary.

4.

IMPLEMENTATION OF INTENTIŌ

Intentiō’s implementation consists of three main features: a wearable power source, a circuit to receive the power from the user, and
carefully designed grounding conditions to create a closed-circuit
model.

4.1

Wearable Power Supply

The wearable power supply (Figure 3 (a)) is powered by smart
devices or other external power sources. The device can be connected via USB or more direct methods, and direct connection to
the battery inside the external power source is required. Since they
have different voltage outputs (usually DC 3.7–5.0 V), we first regulate them to 3.3 V. Then, the source is applied to a transformer
(LM05100), which boosts the voltage to approximately AC 250 V
at 30 kHz. The maximum current at this point is less than 6 mA,
and is considered safe to pass through a human body at 30 kHz.
The AC signal is then supplied to the body through an electrode
pad. We used an electrode that was originally designed for electric
therapy equipment (Omron HV-LLPAD, 98 mm × 64 mm or cut to
half the size, the electrode is washable and reusable). The device
must be in contact with the user; however, its location is not fixed
and there is a lot of freedom as to where the user can carry it, e.g.,
on the wrist, in pockets, in shoes, or anywhere else on the body
(Figure 3 (b)). An electrode can be attached on the back of the
device, or it can be extended from the device with an additional
wire to enable contact with the body when the device is covered by
the user’s clothing.

4.2

Device Receiver

The target electric device does not need an internal power source;
however, it will require a different circuit for activation. Highvoltage AC power is first supplied to the device; therefore, we must
rectify the signal and step-down the power voltage. It is important
to take care not to consume too much current at this stage so that
the power will not influence the performance of the device significantly. We used an LM385 (National Semiconductor) for our prototype, which consumes 10 µA at minimum. However, appropriate
components must be selected depending on the input voltage of the
activated device. An alternative approach is to use a current limiting diode and protect the device from overcurrent. We may also
leave the signal to fluctuate and make it controllable by the user for
interaction. The circuit can be implemented in various forms. Figure 3 (c) is an example of the receiving circuit in a form of a coin
cell.

4.3

Designing the Grounding Conditions

To activate the target device, the device and user must share a
common ground. The user can share a common ground with the device without direct grounding connections because the device can
be connected to the ground via an insulating layer (e.g., air, table
with an insulated coat). However, the conditions of the user and device, in particular, the impedance of the capacitive links connecting
the device to a common ground, crucially influence performance.
For example, the performance may change depending on the distance or the insulating material between the device and the ground.
In the following subsections, we present example circuit models
followed by impedance considerations and performance details of
our current prototype.

4.3.1

Circuit Models

Figure 4 (a) displays an example circuit model of Intentiō. The
user has the Intentiō system in his shoe, where one side of the output is connected to the user via an electrode and the other is connected to the ground. The device side couples its ground to the
table, and the table is linked to the ground. Figure 4 (b) shows an
alternative model in which the grounding is accomplished through
the Intentiō device on the user’s wrist. A variety of circuit models
are available, depending on where the Intentiō device is worn by
the user.
Providing a direct connection between grounds ensures more stability and a larger amount of power. We designed our work for safe
use under these conditions so we can leave application space for
devices that require a larger amount of power. However, creating
direct connections via wires may disturb the users; therefore, we focus on the method that does not require directly connected grounds
for now.

4.3.2

Capacitive Coupling and Body Impedance

Capacitive coupling with the load and the ground are applied,
and the capacitance can be expressed as C = 0 r S/d, where 0 is
the permittivity of free space, r is the permittivity of the relative
material (e.g., air or a table), S is the area of the electrode, and d
is the distance between the electrodes. The reactance X is X =
1/2πf C, where f is frequency. Thus, the relation of the reactance
to the distance and area of the electrodes can be expressed as X =
d/2πf 0 s S.
Although an equivalent model of the body impedance can be expressed as Xb = −1/2πf Cb (Xb is the reactance of the body
and Cb is the capacitance of the body) [8], considering and estimating the impedance of body precisely is difficult because there
are so many elements that influence its value (e.g., voltage, fre-

quency, current duration, contact area, contact pressure, skin condition, moisture level, and current route) [11]. The skin impedance is
the most difficult to characterize since it is nonlinear, time-variable,
and depends on environmental and physiological factors [35]. However, studies show that skin impedance under high-frequency conditions decreases in value and the total body impedance approaches
the internal body impedance [38, 36]. Nevertheless, the impedance
is still difficult to estimate.
The total impedance Zt of the Intentiō circuit model can be expressed as Zt = Zg + Zi + Zb + Zl + Zg0 , where Zg is the
impedance of the device to the ground, Zi is the internal impedance
of the device, Zb is the impedance of the load, and Zg0 is the
impedance of the load with respect to the ground. In most scenarios, Zg and Zi are constant, therefore, techniques mentioned
in REVEL [3] (current sensing the output from the generator) for
constant current output may be applied to stabilize the output of
Intentiō. However, in our present prototype, we stabilize the power
on the receiving device module.

4.3.3

Performance

In the meantime, our system model enables a maximum distribution of approximately 2.0 mA and 5.0 mW. The voltage is not
really an issue because the system can supply over 100 V, which is
far higher than the requirements of low-power electronics, i.e., the
system can activate components requiring up to 100 V as long as
the total power requirement remains under 5.0 mW. Nevertheless,
note that to allow Intentiō to supply this value, a robust connection
is required (e.g., large electrodes or another human body must be
used for grounding). Therefore, lower power is supplied in major
capacitive coupling grounding conditions.
We will display results of some measurements. In the situation
of Figure 4 (a), we used an LED (OptoSupply,OSG58A5111A) as a
load, which was powered by approximately 2.0 V–2.2 V. The voltage was not fixed, since we attempted to measure the performance
of the current value. The LED was loaded on a breadboard with our
receiving circuits. No additional electrode was implemented. The
table used for the capacitance coupling was 1600 mm x 800 mm,
which was made of wood with metallic legs, covered by dielectric
material. When the LED board was on the table, the current value
passing through the LED was 84.5 µA. However, when the board
was lifted up and the distance between the board and the table was
100 mm, the value decreased to 46 µA. The measurement of Figure
4 (b) was established with the same board with the LED. When the
board was 50 mm away from the device, the current value was 52
µA. The value was 43 µA when the distance between the board and
the device was 200 mm. Note that the results may change depending on the body conditions (i.e., the body impedance) as mentioned
in the previous section.

5.

APPLICATION

In this section, we present several proof-of-concept Intentiō applications. We present examples in which we use the system as a
power supply as well as interaction methods that can be applied
through our system. The system has the potential to promote communication between multiple users.

5.1

Activating Electronic Devices

One of our main purposes is to activate the electronic devices that
are increasing in number nowadays, including IoT devices. Many
of these devices require low power, and button cells are often used;
e.g., the standard discharge current of an LR44 button cell is 0.12
mA (in the case of the Toshiba LR44EC). This is sufficiently low
and matches our system’s specifications.

Figure 5: Calculator powered by Intentiō.

Figure 4: Example grounding connections: (a) A user has a
wearable device in his shoe and is potentialized. He touches the
electronic device and distributes power. The powered device is
connected to the ground via the table. (b) A user has a wearable
device on his wrist. The power is distributed to the electronic
device through the user. The ground of the wearable device and
the electronic device is coupled via the air between them.

the music box.
Implanting our receiving circuit into electronic paper crafts [32]
or event cards (e.g., birthday and Christmas cards) may be worth
considering (Figure 6 (c)). Instead of using buttons, sensors, and
button cells to activate these types of paper, the user will simply
touch the card to simultaneously activate it and act as a power supply. Intentiō can eliminate button cells from these types of lowpowered electric elements.

5.3
Figure 5 shows an example of activating a calculator that was
originally powered by button cells. We modified the device, removed the cells, and implanted our own power-receiving circuit.
Furthermore, two electrodes were added to the back of the device;
one the user must touch to supply the power, and the other creates
grounding conditions from the floor or table.

5.2

Interaction for Entertainment

Our system can be used to interact with electronic toys or other
entertainment products that have low-power electronic components.
Figure 6 (a) shows a stuffed toy powered by our system. The toy’s
eyes (LEDs) light up when the user touches and holds the toy. Instead of stabilizing the power supply, we may leave the signal to
vary depending on the grounding conditions. The user can then
move the toy up and down to control the brightness of the eyes,
since creating a larger gap between the toy and the table will change
the power supplied to the toy. This implementation can be also be
applied to an electronic music box (Figure 6 (b)). The user can
switch on the music box and play the music by holding the music
box on the table. When the user wants to adjust the volume, he/she
can hold up the music box. The volume is related to the height of

Multiple-User Interaction

We previously mentioned the issue of ground coupling. A human without our system can also act as a good ground connection.
One user with our system and another user without it can share a
common ground and supply electricity through elements that exist between the two users. Figure 7 (a) shows an LED activated
by two people. The left user is potentialized by wearing the Intentiō device, and the right user is not potentialized. A potential
difference occurs between the users, causing the LED to emit. We
assume that these types of interaction methods can be applied to
encourage and develop communication, e.g., when users touch or
shake hands. Compared with prior research that allows communication and signal transmission via handshaking [1, 50], our system
focuses on visible or perceptual application domains.
Electric gustatory variation is another possible application for
this interaction method. It is known that a human perceives some
taste or food texture when electricity is applied to their tongue [26,
33]. We previously developed an electric fork to augment the gustatory sense when eating [26], and applications for communication
through taste augmentation [25]. However, the electric fork contains circuits and batteries. Using our Intentiō system, electric gustatory variation can be attained using a normal metal fork or a fork
containing simple circuits without batteries. We can consider sce-

Figure 6: Example applications of Intentiō: (a) An electric
stuffed toy powered by the user. (b) A music box powered and
adjusted by the user. (c) A Christmas card with electric components activated by the user.

narios where a user eating with a fork perceives a normal taste, but
when a user with our system helps him/her eat with the fork, he/she
will perceive a different type of taste or texture (Figure 7 (b)).

6.

DISCUSSION

Intentiō has several limitations. We will discuss the limitations
due to interaction and power. We also introduce our vision for future applications that can be considered by applying our concept.

6.1

Interaction Limitation

As the Intentiō system requires the user to directly touch the target device, our approach will not be appropriate for devices that
require continuous power supplies. We assume Intentiō will be
applied to devices that require human interaction and that do not
require continuous power when they are not in use. In addition, the
target device’s range of operation is limited because of the grounding limitations mentioned in the previous section, i.e., the device
cannot be freely held in mid-air. The limitations differ depending
on the size of the devices’ ground areas. However, we are exploring
possibilities by investigating conductive clothing and considering
where to place the wearable device.

6.2

Current Limitation

Our present implementation enables the activation of certain electronic devices and components; however, some devices will require a larger amount of current. The largest issue occurs from
the grounding condition; thus, our circuit model may not be appropriate for such usage. We believe that there is still room to improve
our system to increase the available current. To overcome this limitation, we consider connecting the ground of the device and the user
via an additional wearable. Figure 8 presents a wearable designed

Figure 7: Example applications based on multiple-user interaction: (a) An LED emitted by two people. The left user is potentialized by wearing the Intentiō device, and the right user is not
potentialized. (b) Electric gustatory variation can be attained
using a normal metal fork. The potential differences between
the two users gives one of the users the effect of taste or texture.

for this purpose, where one electrode is extended to the index finger. The power is supplied through the index finger and creates a
closed circuit with the user’s thumb.

6.3

Acceptability

Considering the acceptability for our work is a significant issue. Even though the human body is naturally potentialized by
some electric signals (e.g., from commercial power supplies), some
users still have concerns about applying electricity on their bodies.
Therefore, addressing the safety discussions and presenting safety
guidelines for usage will be important and will help users increase
the acceptability.
Since the device is designed to be wearable, the design may influence this concern as well. We therefore aim to design the wearable system to be small and comfortable. However, the hardware
may be made even smaller by redesigning the circuit, which we are
working on for future studies.
Finally, discussing application domains will also help our system’s acceptance. Clarification of the results and applications that

7.

RELATED WORK

We describe related work from two aspects. One is the powersource side. Several researchers have investigated power distribution to passive objects or the collection and harvesting of energy
to activate low-powered devices. In contrast, many attempts have
been made to apply electricity to the human body. Moving electricity through the human body has been applied for sensing and
actuating human interaction.

7.1

Figure 8: Connecting the ground of the wearable device and
the electronic device will allow a larger amount of power to be
supplied.

would benefit from the system is required. More detailed results
are still required. However, we discuss some potential applications
in the following section.

6.4
6.4.1

Vision of Future Application
Activating Wearables

As well as activating IoT, ubicomp, and everyday devices, we envision applying our concept to activating wearables. We are aware
of an increasing number of wearable devices being developed, including very thin components, circuits, and sheets attached to the
skin [46, 16, 48]. Although these types of wearables are naturally
worn and attached to the user, they require wires or batteries for the
power source, which disturbs the design. Using our system, we can
eliminate the wiring or batteries and activate them from the power
applied from the skin in specific situations. This will still require
some process to the clothing or require limitation of the system position on the user at the current stage.

6.4.2

Signal Modulation

Many applications have been powered using electric signals passing through the body (e.g., Touche [39], Red Tacton [1], PAN [50]
etc.). In these cases, high-frequency signals are used to recognize
the user’s gestures or to communicate with signal transmission. Intentiō does not need to oscillate at a specific frequency; therefore,
we can merge techniques from these types of previous research to
acquire additional information. This can be applied for security
purposes; e.g., a device that only activates when touched by a user
with a specific frequency pattern. However, note that additional
safety discussions are required before using such higher frequency
signals with large current.

6.4.3

Supplying Power from a Distance

In the system described above, we assumed that the user directly
touched the target device. However, a noticeable leakage current
is present, and we may consider using this feature. The amount of
current is very low, so applications might be quite limited; nevertheless, it is possible to slightly light the LED of a stuffed toy by
bringing the user’s hand close to the toy without actually touching
it. We hope that the development of lower-power electric components will improve the possibilities for our applications.

Power Distribution and Harvest

When we consider dealing with electric devices, it is important to
consider their power sources. Although circuits and wires are now
thinner, lighter, and more functional, power sources, e.g., batteries,
are still required. Some researchers have proposed solutions by
distributing power from external elements [28].
The use of a magnetic field is a major method of transferring
power without wiring connections. Magnetic MIMO [14] and PowerShake [47] are devices that charge phone batteries without a direct connection. They use multiple coils and coupling for the power
transfer.
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) is also a common solution, and many RFID products have been deployed [27]. RFID
technologies enable power to be transferred over a distance. WISP
[29], PaperID [20], and RapID [42] are examples of transferring
power to an object and enabling input sensing. They use ultrahigh frequencies and activate the sensors using the power generated
from transceivers, allowing the target device or object to be passive,
without any batteries or other direct power sources.
Gathering energy from the environment is also a method of creating power [24]. The usage of microwave oven leakage [17] is an
energy-harvesting example of activating low-power kitchen devices
with power generated from the environment. Instead of passively
gathering the power from the environment, studies that attempt to
harvest energy from users’ active interaction have been conducted
[6, 45, 2, 43, 19]. These studies consider harvesting power from
handling and interacting with user interfaces. We also build on
these studies’ ideas and focus on supplying power when the user
interacts with an electric device. However, our work does not harvest power; rather, it uses power sources that exist around the user;
e.g., smart devices and mobile batteries.

7.2

Human Body and Electricity

The human body has many electrical characteristics, e.g., resistance, impedance and capacitance, etc. A major use of such characteristics is based on the capacitance change sensed when a human touches an electrode [37, 9, 5, 18]. Gesture recognition is
also a major application. For example, Touche [39] detects human
gestures and interactions by sweeping frequency waves through
the body and detecting the changes. Tomo [49] uses electrical
impedance tomography for monitoring and recognizing gestures.
Mirage [23] is a small sensor that detects abstract gestures made by
the user. The system is based on capacitance changes of the wave
value influenced by the commercial power supply on the body.
Another application is the generation of haptics. Teslatouch [4]
and REVEL [3] induce various haptic sensations, depending on
the frequency and waveform of the electricity offered to the finger. Corona [22] is a wearable device that provides a haptic sensation to users by applying a high voltage to the body and observing the corona discharge that occurs when the user interacts with a
grounded object.
Recently, in the human-computer interaction field, EMS (Electric Muscle Stimulation) technology has been used to computationally manipulate the human body. Possessed Hand [44] and Affor-

dance++ [21] are major examples using EMS. They are applied for
actively training or providing affordance to objects.
There are some notable studies that attempt to use body tissues
as conductive leads. Red Tacton [1] and PAN [50] are studies that
transmit signals through the body for the use of a communication
network.
Although we are aware of many studies that use electricity and
apply it to the human body, Corona and the work proposed by Post
et al. [31, 30] are the only prior work that is applied for power distribution. We share a common interest with these works; however,
we contribute to the research field by proposing further variations
of applications and circuit models with our original method, including safety considerations and discussion. We believe that there is
plenty of room for further studies, discussions, and applications for
power distribution through the human body.

8.

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced a concept where a potentialized human body supplied power through their body by interacting with
low-powered electric devices. A wearable device that supplies highfrequency AC power to the body was presented, followed by a circuit model to enable the activation of electronic devices without
their own power sources.
We addressed the safety concerns that arise when supplying electricity to a human body and presented carefully considered solutions to safely develop and manage our system. Several proofof-concept applications were demonstrated, including the activation of electronic devices, interaction techniques, and application
by multiple users. We discussed the limitations of our system and
introduced possible future applications. We believe that a potentialized human body has the potential to augment and diffuse humancentered interaction.

9.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank all the reviewers for their thoughtful comments for
our submission. We also thank Takashi Miyaki, The University
of Tokyo for helping us improve our work.
This work is supported by JSPS KAKENHI grant number 15J03919
and 14J09902.

10.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Antil, Pinki, and S. Beniwal. Red Tacton : A Review.
International Journal of Science and Engineering Research,
4(3):1–7, March 2013.
[2] A. Badshah, S. Gupta, G. Cohn, N. Villar, S. Hodges, and
S. N. Patel. Interactive generator: a self-powered haptic
feedback device. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, pages
2051–2054, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[3] O. Bau and I. Poupyrev. REVEL: tactile feedback technology
for augmented reality. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
- Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2012, 31, 4(89), 2012.
[4] O. Bau, I. Poupyrev, A. Israr, and C. Harrison. TeslaTouch:
electrovibration for touch surfaces. In Proceedings of the
23nd annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology, UIST ’10, pages 283–292, New York, NY,
USA, 2010. ACM.
[5] P. Dietz and D. Leigh. DiamondTouch: a multi-user touch
technology. In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, UIST
’01, pages 219–226, New York, NY, USA, 2001. ACM.

[6] M. E. Karagozler, I. Poupyrev, G. K. Fedder, and Y. Suzuki.
Paper generators: harvesting energy from touching, rubbing
and sliding. In Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, UIST
’13, pages 23–30, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[7] C. F. Dalziel. Electric shock hazard. IEEE Spectrum,
9(2):41–50, 1972.
[8] K. R. Foster and H. C. Lukasaki. Whole-body
impedance–what does it measure? The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 64(3S):388S–396S, 1996.
[9] T. G. Zimmerman, J. R. Smith, J. A. Paradiso, D. Allport,
and N. Gershenfeld. Applying electric field sensing to
human-computer interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’95, pages 280–287, New York, NY, USA, 1995. ACM.
[10] S. Gangopadhyay, S. Bin Nasir, and A. Raychowdhury.
Integrated power management in IoT devices under wide
dynamic ranges of operation. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual Design Automation Conference, number 149 in DAC
’15, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[11] E. Greenwald. Electrical Hazards and Accidents, pages
28–36. Wiley, 1991.
[12] IEC. IEC 60479: Effects of current on human beings and
livestock, 2005.
[13] International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation
Protection. Guidelines for Limiting Exposure to
Time-Varying Electric, Magnetic, and Electromagnetic
Fields (up to 300 GHz). Health Physics, 74(4):494–522,
1998.
[14] J. Jadidian and D. Katabi. Magnetic MIMO: how to charge
your phone in your pocket. In Proceedings of the 20th
annual international conference on Mobile computing and
networking, MobiCom ’14, pages 495–506, New York, NY,
USA, 2014. ACM.
[15] S. K. Ghai, Z. Charbiwala, D. Mylavarapu, Swarnalathaand
P. Seetharamakrishnan, and R. Kunnath. DC picogrids: a
case for local energy storage for uninterrupted power to DC
appliances. In Proceedings of the fourth international
conference on Future energy systems, e-Energy ’13, pages
27–38, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
[16] L. Kao, Hsin, C. Holz, A. Roseway, A. Calvo, and
C. Schmandt. DuoSkin: rapidly prototyping on-skin user
interfaces using skin-friendly materials. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, ISWC ’16, pages 16–23, New York, NY, USA,
2016. ACM.
[17] Y. Kawahara, X. Bian, R. Shigeta, Z. Vyas, M. M. Tentzeris,
and T. Asami. Power harvesting from microwave oven
electromagnetic leakage. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous
computing, UbiComp ’13, pages 373–382, New York, NY,
USA, 2013. ACM.
[18] K. Kurita, Y. Fujii, and K. Shimada. A new technique for
touch sensing based on measurement of current generated by
electrostatic induction. Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,
170(1):66–71, 2011.
[19] J. Kymisis, C. Kendall, J. Paradiso, and N. Gershenfeld.
Parasitic Power Harvesting in Shoes. In the Second IEEE
International Conference on Wearable Computing, ISWC
’98, pages 132–139. IEEE, 1998.
[20] H. Li, E. Brockmeyer, E. J. Carter, J. Fromm, S. E. Hudson,
S. N. Patel, and A. Sample. PaperID: A Technique for

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

Drawing Functional Battery-Free Wireless Interfaces on
Paper. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’16, pages
5885–5896, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
P. Lopes, P. Jonell, and P. Baudisch. Affordance++:
Allowing Objects to Communicate Dynamic Use. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15, pages 2515–2524,
New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
A. Mujibiya. Corona: Interactivity of Body Electrostatics in
Mobile Scenarios Using Wearable High-Voltage Static
Charger. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services, MobileHCI ’15, pages 435–444, New York, NY,
USA, 2015. ACM.
A. Mujibiya and J. Rekimoto. Mirage: exploring interaction
modalities using off-body static electric field sensing. In
Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, UIST ’13, pages
211–220, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
A. Mujibiya and J. Torii. Walls Have Ears: Using Conductive
Surfaces of Furniture and Everyday Objects for Room-Wide
Power Usage and Crowd Activity Sensing. In Proceedings of
the 2015 International Conference on Interactive Tabletops
and Surfaces, ITS ’15, pages 241–246, New York, NY, USA,
2015. ACM.
H. Nakamura and H. Miyashita. Communication by change
in taste. In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI EA ’11, pages 1994–2004, New
York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
H. Nakamura and H. Miyashita. Controlling saltiness without
salt: evaluation of taste change by applying and releasing
cathodal current. In Proceedings of the 5th international
workshop on Multimedia for cooking and eating activities,
CEA ’13, pages 9–14, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
H. Nishimoto, Y. Kawahara, and T. Asami. Prototype
implementation of ambient RF energy harvesting wireless
sensor networks. In The 9th Annual IEEE Conference on
Sensors, IEEE Sensors 2010, pages 1282–1287. IEEE, 2010.
A. Noda and H. Shinoda. Selective Wireless Power
Transmission Through High-Q Flat Waveguide-Ring
Resonator on 2-D Waveguide Sheet. IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, 59(8):2158–2167,
August 2011.
A. P. Sample, D. J. Yeager, P. S. Powledge, and J. R. Smith.
Design of a Passively-Powered, Programmable Sensing
Platform for UHF RFID Systems. In 2007. IEEE
International Conference on RFID, RFID ’07, pages
149–156, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2007. IEEE.
E. Post, B. Nivi, and N. Gershenfeld. Method and apparatus
for transbody transmission of power and information, 2001.
US Patent 6,211,799.
E. R. Post, M. Reynolds, M. Gray, J. Paradiso, and
N. Gersheneld. Intrabody Buses for Data and Power. In First
International Symposium on Wearable Computers, 1997,
ISWC ’97, pages 52–55. IEEE, 1997.
J. Qi and L. Buechley. Electronic popables: exploring
paper-based computing through an interactive pop-up book.
In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
Tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction, TEI ’10,
pages 121–128, New York, NY, USA, 2010. ACM.
N. Ranasinghe and E. Yi-Luen Do. Digital Lollipop:

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]
[41]

[42]

[43]
[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

Studying Electrical Stimulation on the Human Tongue to
Simulate Taste Sensations. ACM Transactions on Multimedia
Computing, Communications, and Applications,
13(1):Article No. 5, November 2016.
J. P. Reilly. Applied Bioelectricity - From Electrical
Stimulation to Electropathology, chapter 2, pages 52–60.
Springer, 1998.
J. P. Reilly. Applied Bioelectricity - From Electrical
Stimulation to Electropathology, chapter 2, pages 45–48.
Springer, 1998.
J. P. Reilly. Applied Bioelectricity - From Electrical
Stimulation to Electropathology, chapter 2, pages 20–31.
Springer, 1998.
J. Rekimoto. SmartSkin: an infrastructure for freehand
manipulation on interactive surfaces. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’02, pages 113–120, New York, NY, USA,
2002. ACM.
J. Rosell, J. Colominas, P. Riu, R. Pallas-Areny, and
J. Webster. Skin impedace from 1 Hz to 1 MHz. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 35(8):649–651,
August 2002.
M. Sato, I. Poupyrev, and C. Harrison. Touché: enhancing
touch interaction on humans, screens, liquids, and everyday
objects. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’12, pages
483–492, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.
SCENIHR. Possible effects of Electromagnetic Fields (EMF)
on Human Health, 2007.
S. K. Sinha and A. Dhua. Energy Sources in Neonatal
Surgery: Principles and Practice. Journal of Neonatal
Surgery, 3(2)(17), April 2014.
A. Spielberg, A. Sample, S. E. Hudson, J. Mankoff, and
J. McCann. RapID: A Framework for Fabricating
Low-Latency Interactive Objects with RFID Tags. In
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, CHI ’16, pages 5897–5908, New
York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
T. Starner. Human-powered wearable computing. IBM
Systems Journal, 35(3-4):618–629, 1996.
E. Tamaki, T. Miyaki, and J. Rekimoto. PossessedHand:
techniques for controlling human hands using electrical
muscles stimuli. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, pages
543–552, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
N. Villar and S. Hodges. The peppermill: a human-powered
user interface device. In Proceedings of the fourth
international conference on Tangible, embedded, and
embodied interaction, TEI ’10, pages 29–32, New York, NY,
USA, 2010. ACM.
M. Weigel, T. Lu, G. Bailly, A. Oulasvirta, C. Majida, and
J. Steimle. iSkin: Flexible, Stretchable and Visually
Customizable On-Body Touch Sensors for Mobile
Computing. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’15, pages 2991–3000, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
P. Worgan, J. Knibbe, M. Fraser, and D. Martinez, Plasenicia.
PowerShake: Power Transfer Interactions for Mobile
Devices. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’16, pages
4734–4745, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
T. Yokota, P. Zalar, M. Kaltenbrunner, H. Jinno,

N. Matsuhisa, H. Kitanosako, Y. Tachibana, W. Yukita,
M. Koizumi, and T. Someya. Ultraflexible organic photonic
skin. Science Advances, 2(4), April 2016.
[49] Y. Zhang and C. Harrison. Tomo: Wearable, Low-Cost
Electrical Impedance Tomography for Hand Gesture
Recognition. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
UIST ’15, pages 167–173, New York, NY, USA, 2015.
ACM.
[50] T. G. Zimmerman. Personal Area Networks: Near-field
intrabody communication. IBM Systems Journal, 35(3,
4):609–617, 1996.

