Phones on Wheels: Exploring Interaction
for Smartphones with Kinetic Capabilities
Takefumi Hiraki∗

Koya Narumi∗
Koji Yatani
Yoshihiro Kawahara
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{hiraki, narumi, kawahara}@akg.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
koji@iis-lab.org

Figure 1. a: The overview of our hardware prototype. Our mobile accessory includes two robot wheels, offering kinetic capabilities to smartphones. b:
Motor actuation allows a phone enough power to push small loads. c: With sensors, smartphones can kinetically react to the user. d: Thanks to rotary
encoders, wheels can be used as an input channel, such as measuring the length of objects.

ABSTRACT

kinetic capabilities. We achieve this through attaching robot
wheels to smartphones.

This paper introduces novel interaction and applications
using smartphones with kinetic capabilities. We develop an
accessory module with robot wheels for a smartphone. With
this module, the smartphone can move in a linear direction or
rotate with sufficient power. The module also includes rotary
encoders, allowing us to use the wheels as an input modality.
We demonstrate a series of novel mobile interaction for mobile
devices with kinetic capabilities through three applications.

Yamanaka et al. [4] demonstrated kinetic behavior in
smartphones using multiple vibration motors connected to
a case. Their system can offer the user notifications through
motions. For example, the device can move towards the user’s
hand to make a contact for providing haptic notifications. The
device can leave a message by rotation and change of its
orientation for visual information even after the battery runs
out. However, their approach can achieve a very limited set
of movements, and thus interaction design in mobile devices
with kinetic capabilities remains under-explored.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
User Interfaces

We demonstrate a series of interaction that smartphones with
kinetic capabilities enable. We create an accessory with robot
wheels for a smartphone (Figure 1a). This accessory can
control the linear and rotational movements of the phone with
enough power to push small loads (Figure 1b). Sensors in the
smartphone allow interactions such as moving towards / away
from human (Figure 1c). As robot wheels can serve as an input
modality, users can interact with the phone through directly
rotating the wheels (Figure 1d). In this paper, we describe
our implementation, the interaction set our device offers, and
applications demonstrating new forms of mobile interfaces.
We conclude the paper with some future work.

Author Keywords

Mobile interfaces; kinetic interaction.
INTRODUCTION

Recent studies have made efforts on enriching and reshaping
mobile interaction through additional output capabilities.
Examples include haptic enhancements [1], shape-changing
displays [2], and deformable surfaces [3]. This work attempts
to extend the design space of mobile interaction by adding
∗ Joint

first authors.

IMPLEMENTATION

Our prototype device comprises of a smartphone (Google
Nexus5), a custom-made accessory with wheels, and plastic
cases. We manufactured the wheels and cases by 3D printing.
The circuit board in the attachment component includes a
micro-controller, USB-serial converter, motors, motor drivers,
and rotary encoders. It is directly connected to the smartphone,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985727

1
121

Figure 2. Three applications illustrate unique characteristics of our device. A: Runaway Snooze is an alarm application enhanced by motion. By sensing
the user with proximity and light sensors, it escapes from him/her and interferes snooze. B: Hard Push visually emphasizes important notifications by
moving towards the user. C: Scale Trace demonstrates the feasibility of our prototype as an input modality. By measuring width, depth, and height
using rotary encoders, it recommends the user the list of furniture that fits to the space.

controlling and sensing the wheels. We chose a wired
USB connection as a communication bus instead of wireless
methods, achieving robust and responsive controls of the
wheels. This design also allows the power supply of up to 500
mA to the smartphone thanks to the correct USB connection
with negotiation (if there is no negotiation, supply is limited to
100 mA; this value is not enough for driving motors). Although
robot wheels offer direct controls of kinetic behavior, future
work should consider other approaches, such as vibration, soft
robotic actuation, and electrostatic force.

physical objects. But they are susceptible to ambient lighting
conditions and physical shapes. The wheels in our device are
sensitive and can achieve accurate measurements.
Figure 2C shows an example use scenario of Scale Trace.
The user can quickly measure the width, depth, height of a
sideboard to make sure whether it fits into his/her room. The
user can measure lengths on non-flat surfaces as well.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we demonstrate smartphones with kinetic
capabilities. We report the implementation of our prototype
and describe three enabled applications. In future work, we
will deeply examine the design space of smartphones with
kinetic capabilities. We will also explore other possible
approaches to producing kinetic behavior embeddable to
devices in a mobile form-factor.

APPLICATIONS

We present three demonstrations that illustrate the unique
capabilities of our device.
Runaway Snooze

Runaway Snooze is an alarm application enhanced by motion
as shown Figure 2A. When the user is trying to hold the phone
to stop an alarm, the device senses the user’s hand by the light
and proximity sensors and escapes from it. In this manner, the
phone can force the user to wake up and get off from the bed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by ERATO, JST.
REFERENCES

1. Olivier Bau, Ivan Poupyrev, Ali Israr, and Chris Harrison.
2010. TeslaTouch: electrovibration for touch surfaces. In
Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology. 283–292.

We may apply a similar concept to decrease user’s distractions
by mobile phones. When the user is engaged in work on
a laptop, the device gradually moves away from her and
automatically stops notifications about unimportant messages.
When the user is free, the phone moves closer to him/her so
that it can be available to him/her needs.

2. Sungjune Jang, Lawrence H Kim, Kesler Tanner, Hiroshi
Ishii, and Sean Follmer. 2016. Haptic Edge Display for
Mobile Tactile Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 3706–3716.

Hard Push

Hard Push is a new way to inform the user of incoming critical
notifications shown in Figure 2B. For instance, when the phone
receives uncritical emails or messages, it simply notifies the
user in a silent way (e.g., blinking a LED light). But when
an important notification comes, the phone moves towards
the user to encourage him/her to check. Our system can
offer a unique form of ambient displays as illustrated in this
application.

3. Viktor Miruchna, Robert Walter, David Lindlbauer,
Maren Lehmann, Regine Von Klitzing, and Jörg Müller.
2015. GelTouch: Localized Tactile Feedback Through
Thin, Programmable Gel. In Proceedings of the 28th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software &
Technology. 3–10.
4. Shota Yamanaka and Homei Miyashita. 2014. Vibkinesis:
notification by direct tap and’dying message’using
vibronic movement controllable smartphones. In
Proceedings of the 27th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology. 535–540.

Scale Trace

Scale Trace is an example of demonstrations where robot
wheels serve as an input modality. Existing applications
mostly employ vision-based methods to measure the length of
2
122

