Expanding the Field-of-View of Head-Mounted Displays with
Peripheral Blurred Images
Wataru Yamada

Hiroyuki Manabe

Research Labs, NTT DOCOMO
3-6, Hikarinooka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, Japan
{wataruyamada, manabehiroyuki}@acm.org
units are especially popular in the type. For example, STAR
VR has 210◦ horizontal field-of-view(FOV) which covers
more than 75% of the entire human vision using two highresolution displays (2560 x 1440 pixels) and complex Fresnel
lenses. The other type uses smartphones like Google Cardboard2 . The type consists of lenses and a case, and user’s
smartphone is attached as display and processing units . The
biggest advantage of this type is greater reduced cost, because
only lenses and a case are needed in addition to the smartphone.

ABSTRACT

Head-mounted displays are rapidly becoming popular. Fieldof-view is one of the key parameters of head-mounted displays, because a wider field-of-view gives higher presence
and immersion in the virtual environment. However, wider
field-of-view often increase device cost and weight because
it needs complicated optics or expensive modules such as
multi high-resolution displays or complex lenses. This paper proposes a method that expands the field-of-view by using two kinds of lenses with different levels of magnification. The principle of the proposed method is that Fresnel
lenses with high magnification surround convex lenses to fill
the peripheral vision with a blurred image. The proposed
method doesn’t need complicated optics, and is advantageous
in terms of device cost and weight, because only two additional Fresnel lenses are necessary. We implement a prototype and confirm that the Fresnel lenses fill the peripheral
with a blurred image, and effectively expand the field-ofview.

Unfortunately, the type using a smartphone is inferior to the
other in performances. In particular, it is difficult to emulate
the type having modules more than two high-resolution displays in the FOV, because the type using smartphone has only
single display.
Although HMD having a wide FOV induces simulator sickness more easily than narrow one, wide FOV also gives higher
presence and immersion[1]. Thus, number of researches had
tried to make FOV wider to enhance user experience in VR
environments; however, technical difficulties in producing
commercial devices with wide FOV (e.g., complicated optics, increased weight etc.) often limit the available FOV[2].
Robert et al[2] focused on the fact that peripheral vision has
much lower resolution than foveal vision. In order to expand
FOV, they proposed to fill the periphery of the HMD with a
low-resolution, high-contrast array of diffused, colored LED
lights, whose driving signals are tightly coupled to the content presented on the device. Their approach can expand FOV
without complicated optics; however, it is still difficult to apply it to smartphone HMDs because of the additional costs;
it needs various devices such as a lot of colored LED lights,
processing units, battery and diffuser panel.

Author Keywords

Head-mounted display; Virtual reality; Field-of-view;
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
User Interfaces
INTRODUCTION

Technological improvements such as better displays, greater
processing power and higher mobility have made it possible
for head-mounted display (HMD) with high immersion to become popular consumer products. Many HMD products for
Augmented and Virtual Reality (AR and VR) have been released, and many applications are being created.

Our solution is to expand the FOV by using two kinds of
lenses having different focal lengths. The proposed method
combines a convex lens with normal focal length with a Fresnel lens with shorter focal length for each eye. The convex
lens fit into a hole at the center of the Fresnel lens. The convex lens shows high-resolution image in foveal vision. Moreover, the Fresnel lens around convex lens fills the peripheral
vision with blurred image. The result is analogous to wearing
glasses for near-sighted eyes. The glasses yield a clear image across the glass lens but beyond the frame the image is
blurred.

There are mainly two types in HMDs. One is a HMD having
processing units, displays and lenses like STAR VR1 . The
HMD having two high-resolution displays and processing
1

InfinitEye. StarVR Tech Specs, http://www.starvr.com/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985735

2

141

Google Cardboard, https://vr.google.com/cardboard/

The proposed method has the advantages low weight and cost
and high versatility. The weight penalty is basically insignificant. This is a critical advance to encourage rapid adoption.
The cost penalty is also small, because the proposed method
only needs two additional Fresnel lenses. Thus, the proposed
method supports both types of HMDs. Moreover, our approach doesn’t need any new software programs. Existing
contents and applications can be used directly.

IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION

Figure 1. Overall image of our prototype. The prototype has two pairs
of Fresnels lens and convex lens. Grossly distorted images of the screen
are shown by the Fresnels lenses.

Fig.1 shows the prototype that we implemented based Google
Cardboard. The prototype has two 30mm diameter convex
lenses with 40mm focal length and two Fresnel lenses (70
x 68 x 2 mm) with 25mm focal length. All lens centers lie
on the same plane. An Apple iPhone 6 was set 37mm from
the lens plane. The other arrangements basically followed the
Google Cardboard approach.
A screen size of iPhone 6 (104 x 59 mm) is smaller than the
entire size of two Fresnel lenses. Fig.1 shows that the image
of the screen reaches the edges of Fresnel lenses. The images of Fresnel lenses are grossly distorted as Fig.1 shows,
because the Fresnel lenses have much short focal length and
the images are captured away from them. Users in wearing
the prototye doesn’t see images grossly distorted like Fig.1

Figure 2. Close-up images from the inside of prototype. (a) the prototype
having convex lenses and Fresnel lenses. (b) the prototype having only
convex lense and black opaque boards instead of Fresnel lense. Both
images were captured focusing on the screen through the convex lenses.
The Fresnel lenses fill the peripheral area with blurred images.

We captured two close-up images to confirm the view of
the proposed method. Fig.2(a) is a close-up of the prototype. Fig.2(b) is a close-up of the prototype where the Fresnel
lenses were replaced with black opaque boards. Both images
are taken focused on the screen, though the convex lenses.

CONCLUSION

A method that places convex lenses in the center of Fresnel
lenses with shorter focal length was proposed to widen the
FOV of HMDs. The Fresnel lenses fill the areas peripheral to
the clear center image with blurred images. This is possible
due to the different characteristics of our foveal vision and
peripheral vision. We implemented a prototype to confirm
the characteristics of the proposed method. Both clear image
and blurred image were simultaneously observed in close-up
images produced by the prototype. Total image area is wider
than that of the images produced using only convex lens, confirming that the FOV was widened. We also confirmed that
the blurred image of the Fresnel lens contributed to obscuring
the overlapping and discontinuous area and lattice patterns of
the screen. We intend to redesign the architecture of the prototype to suit the use of precise optics. Moreover, we will
evaluate how well the proposal is accepted by users and its
effect on simulator sickness.

The screen is clearly visible through the convex lens in both
images. The periphery is filled with black in Fig.2(b). In
contrast, the Fresnel lens filled the periphery a blurred image
of the screen in Fig.2(a), which effectively widened the entire
FOV. Note that the focal length of the Fresnel lens is much
shorter than normal.
The periphery image in Fig.2(a) is strongly blurred because of
the large focal length difference between the Fresnel lens and
the convex lens. A user sees both clear and blurred images in
actual use, because it is impossible to focus simultaneously
on both images. The result is natural because the blurred images are lie in the field of peripheral vision.
Incidentally, characteristics of peripheral vision and blurred
images benefit in some cases. A focal length of the Fresnel
lens is much shorter than lenses normally used for HMD. It
causes two kinds of visual effect. One is that an overlapping
and discontinuous areas germinate in a user’s view. The other
is that lattice patterns of the screen can outstand, especially in
low-resolution display. The characteristics of peripheral vison and blurred images contribute to obscure an overlapping
area and lattice patterns. As a result, it reduces the unnaturalness of the HMD.

REFERENCES

1. James Jeng-Weei Lin, Henry B.L. Duh, D. E. P. H. A.-R.,
and Furness, T. A. Effects of field of view on presence,
enjoyment, memory, and simulator sickness in a virtual
environment. In Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality
2002 (2002), 164–171.
2. Robert Xiao, H. B. Augmenting the field-of-view of
head-mounted displays with sparse peripheral displays. In
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (2016), 1221–1232.

We confirmed that the proposed method expand FOV of
HMD through the observation of the prototype, altough the
prototype was designed and fabricated without precise optics
and custom-made parts.

142

