Reconstruction of Scene from Multiple Sketches
Ayuri Tomohiro
Future University Hakodate
Hakodate, Japan
a-tomohiro@sumilab.org

Yasuyuki Sumi
Future University Hakodate
Hakodate, Japan
sumi@acm.org
presents our current prototype of the proposed system and
examples of its usage, to show that our system facilitates its
users’ rapid extraction of target objects and spaces seen from
their individual viewpoints.

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses the feasibility of extension of expressive
style with multiple 3D sketches drawn by a sketching tool
that enables its users to draw and paint on 3D structured
surfaces. Users of our proposed system take a picture of
target objects and sketch with reference to the taken picture.
They can not only sketch on the pictures but can also change
their viewpoint of the sketched environment, since the system
captures 3D structure by using a depth sensor as well as
RGB data. Trial usage of the system shows that our users
can rapidly extract their target objects/space and extend
their ideas by taking pictures and drawing/painting on them.
This paper discribes a notion of reconstructing scenes from
multiple sketches.

RELATED WORK

Teddy [2] helps its users to intuitively sketch 3D models
using 2D drawings, but it does not aim at expressing
individuality and originality. There are other approaches
involving sketching on 3D models that place importance on
individuality and originality, such as in [3] and [4]. However,
the drawing in these approaches is it does not capture the 3D
structure of real objects. We aim to expand the sketching of
real objects and enable users to change their viewpoint in the
sketched environment and share their sketch with other users.

Author Keywords
DRAWING AND INTERACTIVE VISUALIZATION

Sketching; interactive illustrations.

We use tablet PCs as sketching devices, and the ASUS Xtion
as a depth sensor. The resulting sketches are 3D and allow
users to change their viewpoints. Users begin by taking
pictures of target objects, as with a normal camera. At
the same time, the system captures 3D depth information
with RGB information. Users can intuitively draw on the
pictures and externalize their ideas on them. Afterwards,
they can explore the sketched environment by changing their
viewpoints. Users repeat the process of photographing,
drawing, and altering the viewpoint to complete the sketch.
This repetition prompts them to observe the hidden parts and
3D structure of the target object.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 Information interfaces and presentation :
Interfaces: Graphical user interfaces

User

INTRODUCTION

Sketching is an intuitive and powerful method to capture
and externalize designers’ ideas. We already proposed a
sketching tool to enable designers to understand and design
the 3D structure of target objects and spaces, by using a
tablet PC and a camera with a depth sensor [1]. Users of
the proposed system can take a picture of target objects and
sketch with reference to the taken picture. They can not only
sketch on the picture, but also change their viewpoint of the
sketched environment since the system captures 3D structure
using a depth sensor as well as RGB data. Resultantly, users
can easily understand and manipulate the target objects by
sketching, and then extend their ideas by drawing the textures
they picture in their minds onto the 3D surface. We extended
our system to collaborative spatial designing by multiple
users, by enabling the merging of several 3D sketches. This
arrows the users not only to merge several sketches to extend
their sketch space and mix different viewpoints, but also
to conduct spatial designing by multiple users. This paper

EXAMPLES
Merging different viewpoints

Figure 1 (c-e) shows an example of prototyping a pseudo
3D object with two sketches (a,b) from different viewpoints.
These sketches are drawn from different viewpoints. The
subject of one of the sketches is the surface of a box, the
subject of the other is the inside of the box. By merging
sketches, users can make a sketch which depicts the box from
two viewpoints.
Expanding a space

Figure 5 shows an example of prototyping a pseudo 3D space
with two sketches. In this example, the user firstly took
several pictures while walking through the hallway of an old
building. Secondly, he selected two pictures from those he
had taken, drew and painted on them and then put them onto
a virtual 3D canvas using our tool, so that we can virtually
walk through and look around the space. The user tried to
find better locations and viewpoints by taking pictures and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985736

143

Figure 3. Capturing a series of frame from animation while change the
viewpoint.

Figure 4. Three time-lapse sketches.
Figure 1. (a-b) Two sketches of a box drawn by the user from two
viewpoints. (c-d) The result of merging.

Figure 5. Sketch of a plaster figure. The expressive style is a mix of the
three user’s styles.

CONCLUSION

In this paper we discussed the feasibility of extension of
expressive style with multiple 3D sketches drawn by a
sketching tool that enables its users to draw and paint
on 3D structured surfaces. The trial usage showed that,
by combining multiple sketches, we can make sketches
that mix multiple viewpoints, virtually walk through and
look around the sketched space, and produce collaborative
sketches of objects. We aim to realize collaborative spatial
designing from multiple sketches and facilitates its users’
rapid extraction of target objects, access to spaces seen
from their individual viewpoints and exchange intuitively
exchange of views.

Figure 2. Example of prototyping a pseudo 3D space with two sketches.

painting on them several times in order to better capture his
experience of touring the building. Our system enables users
to easily capture and rethink the target environment, and then
encourages their rapid prototyping through trial and error.
Animation with time-lapse sketches

Figure 3 is an example of 3D animation using three sketches
(Figure 4a-c). In this animation, time-lapse sketches are
displayed and switched in sequence: A, B, C, B, A .... As
shown in Figure 3, it is possible to change the viewpoint while
animating the sketch. Just by drawing a few sketches, users
can reproduce motion and the lapse of time.

REFERENCES

1. A. Tomohiro and Y. Sumi. 2015. ”Sketching on 3D
structured surfaces” In Adjunct Proc. UbiComp/ISWC’15.
pp. 397–400.
2. T. Igarashi, S. Matsuoka, and H. Tanaka. 1999. ”Teddy: A
sketching interface for 3D freeform design” In Proc.
SIGGRAPH99. pp. 409–416.

Collaborative sketch

3. R. Kalnins, L. Markosian, B. Meier, M. Kowalski, J.
Lee,P. Davidson, M. Webb, J. Hughes, and A. Finkelstein.
2002. ”WYSIWYG NPR: drawing strokes directly on 3D
models” In Proc. SIGGRAPH02, pp. 755–762.

Figure 5 (d-f) shows three sketches (a-c), drawn individually
by three different users from three different viewpoints,
which have been merged to create one plaster figure. The
expressive style is a mix of the three user’s styles. In
this example, each user takes a photo form a different
viewpoint and sketches, then each sketch is shared in real
time on their canvas. This arrows the users to look all
around each other’s viewpoints, check individual points of
focus and points of view, and exchange ideas and discoveries.

4. J. Schmid, M. S. Senn, M. Gross, and R. W. Sumner.
2011. ”Overcoat: An implicit canvas for D painting”
ACM Trans. Graph. 30,4, Article 28(2011), 10 pages.

144

