Switch++: An Output Device of the Switches by the Finger
Gestures
Yukiko Yokomizo, Tomoya Kotegawa, Paul Haimes, Tetsuaki Baba
Graduate School of System Design, Tokyo Metropolitan University
6-6 Asahigaoka, Hino Tokyo JAPAN
Switches can have various feelings of operation - for instance,
a push switch, a dial switch, a toggle switch, or a rocker
switch. For example, one would use a push switch or rocker
switch when turning on the power, or use a dial switch when
adjusting the volume on a music player. In other words, the
type of switches used will differ depending on what a user is
operating. The user must recognize a certain amount of information and use them properly because existing switches
have only one mode of operation. In this study, we focused
on these differences between the sensation of operating the
switches and expressed several operating sensations so as to
decrease the number of the switches. Therefore, we propose a
new method of operability for devices by providing multiple
switches dynamically, and users choose the switch that has
the functionality that they want to use.

ABSTRACT

Regarding human-machine-interfaces, switches have not
changed significantly despite the machines themselves evolving constantly. In this paper, we propose a new method of operability for devices by providing multiple switches dynamically, and users choose the switch that has the functionality
that they want to use. Switch++ senses the mental model of
the operating sensation of switches against the users finger
gestures and changes the shape of the switch and its affordances accordingly. We design the interface based on the raw
data.
Author Keywords

Switch; Interfaces; Affordances; Gestures.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. User Interfaces: Input devices and strategies.

RELATED WORK

The switch needs to change shape to enable expression of a
number of operating sensations in a single switch. Haptic
Chameleon by Michelitsch et al. [2] provided multiple operating sensations by changing the shape of the knob section.
However, representing various operating sensations by only
changing the shape of the knob section is difficult. Therefore,
in our research we did not provide multiple operating sensations by changing the switch itself, but conducted a study
using the feelings of his or her accustomed operation using
existing switches. We made the device capable of four types
of input: push by using a push switch, horizontal knob by using a dial switch, vertical knob by using a toggle switch, and
grasp by using a joystick.

INTRODUCTION

Interfaces in devices such as vehicles and household appliances possess many buttons and switches. In modern devices
that contain a lot of various functions, it becomes important
for the user to be able to distinguish between them. However,
interfaces with many switches can contain a lot of information, which can confuse users and easily lead to human error
[1]. The possibility that a pushing error can cause a serious
accident is high because there are many switches in for example the inside of a car or the cockpit of plane. Regarding
human-machine-interfaces, switches have not changed significantly despite the machines themselves evolving constantly,
and much research is focused primarily in the advancement of
machine functionality and performance rather than switches.

There are many studies about an interface providing affordances through shape change. Affordance refers to how to
use things and how they function and was concepts introduced by Norman [3]. It is an important element of interface design. inFORM by Follmer et al. [4] provided dynamic
physical affordances through a shape display. Morphees by
Roudaut et al. [5] is a hand-held device that provided affordances through shape change. In this way, changing the
shape in accordance with the user s situation provides a mental model of the machines by affordances through the shape.
Metamorph by Bailly et al. [6] analyzed the users mental
model against a keyboard shortcut and provided the aspects
of keyboards as new interfaces. Our study is similar to these
studies in that the interfaces have an operability suitable for
affordances, however Switch++ senses the mental model of
the operating sensation of switches against the users finger
gestures and changes the shape of the switch and its affor-

Previous studies of switches have described evaluations of the
sense of pushing and about verifications of factors that result
in a pushing error. However, it appears that there are few studies regarding the attributes of existing switches - such as sensitivity and physiological evaluation - that have been carried
out. Therefore, new research about these facets of switches is
essential.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
Copyright c 2016 ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984753

169

dances accordingly. Therefore, Switch++ strengthen the interaction between human and machine.

motor (39BYGL215) presented the chosen switch by sensing
the users gestures so that the user can then use it (Figure4).
Two motors were moved by using the stepping motor driver
(L6470), and the combined 12 photoelectric sensors from input stage, and were controlled by an Arduino MEGA 2560
(Figure5).

METHOD

In this study, we categorized user interaction as input and output. Firstly, a user imagines a suitable switch for operating
feeling and makes a gesture using their fingers according to
the type of switch they wish to use. This is the input stage.
Secondly, the device provides the shape of the switch according to the gesture made. This is the output stage (Figure1).

Figure 4. The architecture of output device.

Figure 1. The relationships between ”use” and ”input”, and ”output”.

Input

In this research, we detected the finger gestures using 12 photoelectric sensors (RPR-220). These sensors were tilted o 45
degrees, placed in a circle and controlled by an Arduino Micro. Four types of gestures were detected: push, horizontal
knob, vertical knob and grasp. The push gesture corresponds
to a push switch, the horizontal knob gesture corresponds to a
dial switch, the vertical knob gesture corresponds to a toggle
switch and the grasp gesture corresponds to a joystick (Figure2). Ten participants performed one gesture 50 times, thus
we providing 2000 row data in total. Figure3 reflect the result
from the collected raw data.

Figure 5. The output flow diagram.

CONCLUSION

We analyzed the raw data by using the Weka Toolkit. We
used a support vector machine (SMO), a k-nearest neighbor
algorithm (IBk), a Bayesian network (Baysnet), and multilayered neural network (Multilayer Perceptron). As a result, the
correctly classified instances were 86.6% by SMO, they were
95% by IBk, they were 81.85% by Baysnet , and they were
90.85%.
REFERENCES

1. James Reason.Human Error.Cambridge University Press,
1990.
2. G, Michelitsch. J, Williams. M, Osen. B, Jimenez., and S,
Rapp. Haptic Chameleon: A New Concept of Shape
Changing User Interface Controls with Force Feedback.
In Proc, CHI 2004, ACM Press (2004), 1305-1308.

Figure 2. The finger gestures.

3. Donald A. Norman.The Psychology Of Everyday Things.
Basic Books,1988.
4. S, Follmer. D, Leithinger. A, Olwal. A, Hogge., and H,
Ishii. inFORM: Dynamic Physical Affordances and
Constraints through Shape and Object Actuation. In Proc,
UIST 2013, ACM Press (2013), 417-426.
5. A, Roudaut. A, Karnik. M, Löchtefeld., and S,
Subramanian. Morphees: Toward High ”Shape
Resolution” in Self- Actuated Flexible Mobile Devices.
In Proc, CHI 2013, ACM Press (2013), 593-602.

Figure 3. The result of the collected raw data.

6. G, Bailly. T, Pietrzak. J, Deber., and D, Wigdor.
Métamorphe: Augmenting Hotkey Usage with Actuated
Keys. In Proc, CHI 2013, ACM Press (2013), 563-572.

Output

Based on the raw data, Switch++ offered the shape of
the switch along the gestures. A stepping motor (SM42BYG011-25) rotated four switches and a linear stepping

170

