Transparent Reality: Using Eye Gaze Focus
Depth as Interaction Modality
Yun Suen Pai

Benjamin Outram

Noriyasu Vontin

Kai Kunze

Graduate School of
Media Design, Keio
University, Japan

Graduate School of
Media Design, Keio
University, Japan

Fujitsu Design Ltd.
Kawasaki, Japan

Graduate School of
Media Design, Keio
University, Japan

Figure 1. (a) Focus depth of the user where left is close and right is far, (b) Custom hardware, integrating a pupil labs
tracker into Oculus, and (c) Experimental setup

some stimulus (e.g. smooth pursuit) for less stressful gaze
interactions [4]. This paper presents an initial prototype of
focus depth implementation in a standard VR headset.
Although a couple of researchers already implemented
binocular eye tracking systems in VR [3], so far we are not
aware of any research using focus depth tracking as an
interaction modality. Our contributions are as follows: (1)
We implemented a custom prototype to use eye gaze focus
depth as novel input modality for VR applications. (2) We
show a sample application using focus as a switching
mechanism and show that interactions using focus depth
information are comparable to explicit input of a scroll
wheel. (3) We present guidelines and application cases for
using eye gaze depth in VR systems.

ABSTRACT

We present a novel, eye gaze based interaction technique,
using focus depth as an input modality for virtual reality
(VR) applications. We also show custom hardware
prototype implementation. Comparing the focus depth based
interaction to a scroll wheel interface, we find no
statistically significant difference in performance (the focus
depth works slightly better) and a subjective preference of
the users in a user study with 10 participants playing a
simple VR game. This indicates that it is a suitable interface
modality that should be further explored. Finally, we give
some application scenarios and guidelines for using focus
depth interactions in VR applications.
ACM Classification Keywords: H.5.1 [Information

IMPLEMENTATION

Interfaces and presentation]: Multimedia Information
Systems – Artificial, augmented, and virtual realities
Author Keywords: Virtual reality; Eye tracking; Focus

depth; Interaction modality
INTRODUCTION

Eye tracking and eye movement analysis is often used in
psychology experiments, marketing etc. to better understand
user’s intentions [1], as implicit input in gaming or as automatic tagging and context recognition tool during
everyday life [5]. So far, there are only few researchers
exploring explicit eye- gaze based interactions, as users
often feel eye fatigue [2]. The best approaches seem to use
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984754

171

We modified an Oculus Rift DK2 HMD for the initial
prototype of the system. It consists of two infrared (IR)
eye trackers by Pupil Labs that are placed in the cavity of
the HMD just below the lenses to capture the user’s eyes.
The HMD’s lenses were modified to provide more space
for the cameras without interfering with the user’s
comfort. The lenses were cut about one third of its total
height at the bottom to achieve this. The result are shown
in Figure 1(b). Since the Pupil trackers do not support VR
environments by default, a custom plugin was written for
the tracking software with Python that enables the raw
data from the trackers to directly stream into Unity via
open sound control (OSC). Unity then reads these values
directly into the VR environment. We are using the two
normal vectors of the iris for both eyes (provided by the
pupil software) to perform the depth calculation, detecting
the intersection point or the vector that represents the
shortest distance between the two vectors. The focus
depth is accurate for distances between 5 - 25 meters in
VR space. For the user study, we use a calibration system

based on the K- nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithm that
teaches the system to recognize two layers of depth in the
VR world. By selecting K= 3, KNN calculates the
Euclidean distances of the current eye gaze with the
trained values to determine the two closes values of K that
contains the information of the layer currently being
observed. This allows a robust user dependent recognition.

our method is at least comparable to the scroll- wheel
implementation.
APPLICATION CASES AND GUIDELINES

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

We conducted a case study to determine the usability of the
proposed system by comparing two methods: scroll-based
and gaze-based. The scroll-based method utilizes a more
conventional approach where the user is required to obtain
scores by touching a sphere, which is controlled with a
mouse, to a 2D square placed in front of the user. However,
the squares’ position also change in the z-axis (depth). The
scroll wheel allows the sphere to move in the z-axis. For the
gaze-based method, the scroll wheel’s function of depth
control is substituted with eye gaze. After the calibration
phase, the task is no different than the scroll-based method,
except that the user is now able to control the sphere’s depth
simply by focusing near or far. A total of 10 participants,
consisting of 6 males and 4 females aged between 20 and 25
and have variable degree of eye sight clarity were given a
score-based task in the VR environment. At the end of the
session, each participant is then required to complete the
System Usability Scale (SUS) score questionnaire to
determine the gaze-based method’s intuitiveness.

Since the proposed system offers a new layer of interaction
in VR, it has the potential to provide a hands-free
experience in VR that preserves the immersion. For
example, this method of selection would be useful for
heads-up-display (HUD) based interaction where the user
just focuses close to see the HUD, and focuses far to see the
main content. This is particularly useful in spectating sports.

Figure 3. The scoreboard changes in transparency depending on the
user’s focus depth.

Along the lines of the transparent HUD, focus depth can
also be used for menu selection tasks, where different focus
depths are associated with different menus. Another
application in VR is that it can provide a user with a
window to the physical world by mounting a camera on
the HMD. By focusing close, the user may switch back to
the physical world, while focusing far causes the physical
world layer to fade away.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We presented a novel interaction technique based on eye
gaze focus depth for virtual environments. Our prototype
imple- mentation are comparable in performance to scroll
wheel interactions with the advantage of being hands-free.
In the future, we will determine the presence of eye fatigue.

Figure 2. SUS Score of 65.5 of the proposed method and the average
scores for both scroll-based and gaze-based method for the first, second
and third trial

The achieved scores are rather comparable overall with
gaze-based method marginally higher in all three rounds,
proving that its precision is also comparable to mouse
movement. Two of the participants wore spectacles and had
no previous experience with eye tracking and VR. One of
the participant needed to remove it while wearing the HMD,
whereas the other was able to fit the spectacles in it.
Participant 6 and participant 8 suffers from both short
sightedness, while participant 8 suffers from minor diplopia.
This leads to difficulty in focusing at objects. If the results
for both of these participants were excluded, the new SUS
score would be 69, which is above the average SUS score
that is deemed as a favorable system. Applying a T-Test on
the score results show that for the first session, a p-value of
0.804 was obtained. For the following second and third
session, the value steadily decreases from 0.4266 to 0.295
respectively. There is no statistical significance between the
scroll-wheel and focus-depth based method. Indicating that

172

REFERENCES
1. Serkan Alkan and Kursat Cagiltay. 2007. Studying computer
game learning experience through eye tracking. British
Journal of Educational Technology 38, 3 (2007), 538–542.
2. Heiko Drewes, Alexander De Luca, and Albrecht Schmidt.
2007. Eye-gaze interaction for mobile phones. In
Proceedings of the 4th international conference on mobile
technology, applications, and systems and the 1st
international symposium on Computer human interaction in
mobile technology. ACM, 364–371.
3. Andrew T Duchowski, Vinay Shivashankaraiah, Tim
Rawls, Anand K Gramopadhye, Brian J Melloy, and
Barbara Kanki. 2000. Binocular eye tracking in virtual
reality for inspection training. In Proceedings of the 2000
symposium on Eye tracking research & applications.ACM,
89–96.
4. Augusto Esteves, Eduardo Velloso, Andreas Bulling, and
Hans Gellersen. 2015. Orbits: Gaze Interaction for Smart
Watches using Smooth Pursuit Eye Movements. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software & Technology. ACM, 457–466.
5. Yoshio Ishiguro, Adiyan Mujibiya, Takashi Miyaki, and Jun
Rekimoto. 2010. Aided eyes: eye activity sensing for daily
life. In Proceedings of the 1st Augmented Human
International Conference. ACM, 25.

