Touchscreen Overlay Augmented with the Stick-Slip
Phenomenon to Generate Kinetic Energy
1

Ahmed Farooq, 1Philipp Weitz, 1Grigori Evreinov, 1Roope Raisamo, 2Daisuke Takahata
1

Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction, University of Tampere, Finland
FUKOKU Motors, FUKOKU CO., LTD., Ageo-Shi, Saitama, 362-8561, Japan

2

Email: 1{FirstName.LastName}@staff.uta.fi, 2{FirstLetterofFirstName_LastName}@fukoku-rubber.co.jp
ABSTRACT

needed to simulate the properties of virtual objects. Large
standalone devices like the Geomagic’s Phantom and
Novint Falcon may provide meaningful interactions in a
controlled haptic space, but they are unsuitable for common
touchscreen interaction in mobile and hand-held devices.
Therefore, this research focuses on a physical phenomenon
(stick-slip) by which it is possible to transmit in a linkagefree manner, kinetic energy as directional forces, to a stylus
tip to generate tactile-kinesthetic afferentation with the help
of a screen overlay.

Kinesthetic feedback requires linkage-based high-powered
multi-dimensional manipulators, which are currently not
possible to integrate with mobile devices. To overcome this
challenge, we developed a novel system that can utilize a
wide range of actuation components and apply various
techniques to optimize stick-slip motion of a tangible object
on a display surface. The current setup demonstrates how it
may be possible to generate directional forces on an
interactive display in order to move a linkage-free stylus
over a touchscreen in a fully controlled and efficient
manner. The technology described in this research opens up
new possibilities for interacting with displays and tangible
surfaces such as continuously supervised learning; active
feed-forward systems as well as dynamic gaming
environments that predict user behavior and are able modify
and physically react to human input at real-time.

RELATED WORK

Generating lateral forces on top of a touchscreen using a
screen overlay has been addressed earlier [1, 7]. Many
studies have been carried out to characterize user sensitivity
to varying micro-displacements. However, most of these
studies are intended for the purposes of providing tactile
stimulation, and do not target tangible object manipulation,
on the touchscreen itself. Furthermore, recent friction
modulation research [2] illustrates how it may be possible
by modulating the friction coefficient between the onscreen
tangible objects and the display itself to create directional
forces on interactive surfaces [5]. Friction modulation can
be achieved in multiple ways [2, 5, 6], but in this research,
our focus was to construct a mechanism to employ the
stick-slip effect, which uses the variation in static and
dynamic friction coefficients to transfer energy [8].

Author Keywords

User Interfaces; Tangible Interfaces; Multimodal
Interaction.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 User Interfaces; Graphical user interfaces (GUI);
Haptic I/O; Input devices and strategies; Prototyping.
INTRODUCTION

Kinesthetic information is the main component of haptic
feedback that integrates diverse afferent signals into the
entire percept. By generating a combination of directional
forces and torques, it is possible to simulate some physical
properties of virtual objects at real time. Different systems
and transducers can be used to deliver these forces [1] in
augmented haptic space. Based on these transducers, a
number of devices [3, 4] have been developed which use
kinetic energy to provide kinesthetic sense and convey
information regarding different qualities and properties of
virtual objects. However, most of these devices use linkages
and stiff chains to generate the strong directional forces

Stick-slip Kinesthetic Display Surface

Figure 1. Various embodiments of the SKDS prototype.

The core system for delivering kinesthetic signals was
designed as an overlay for the MS Surface Pro 3 tablet (Fig.
1). Four actuators were affixed to the plexiglas plate to in
the center of each side using U-shaped aluminum brackets
Unlike Reznik [8] and Perlin [7], we employed saw-tooth
waves by forcing the objects stick and slip [9]. Thus the
directional forces applied were used to manipulate stylus tip
displacements on a flat surface covering the touchscreen.
The position and pressure of the object was continuously
monitored and, based on this information, an algorithm was
computed to dynamically adjust the actuation pattern
applied to the assembly of the 4 actuators.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of
this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984758

179

SYSTEM EVALUATION & DISCUSSION

were asked to use the graphical Application with kinesthetic
feedback and simple onboard vibrotactile feedback (of the
Microsoft Surface Pro 3 tablet) on the SKDS and were then
asked to rate the haptic feedbacks according to sensibility,
pleasure-ability and usefulness. Results suggest that the
sensibility of the onboard vibrotactile feedback was very
poor; therefore users preferred the SKDS and found it to be
much more useful for the particular task. However, we
believe that further research would prove SKDS can be
more useful in a wide range of application and devices.

The SKDS core design employed 4 actuators affixed to
each side of the screen overlay which created the
directional forces to generate stick-slip motion. However,
no actuator being utilized in these prototypes was primarily
designed for this task. Therefore, we evaluated four
different types of actuators to gauge the SKDS efficiency
and ability to generate stable forces for stick-slip motion.
These included pull-type solenoids (STC-05C-A05) two
different types of piezoelectric actuators (APA120s,
PPA40L) and custom electromagnetic actuators (eLA_X2).

Figure 5. User Feedback on SKDS vs onboard haptic actuation.
Figure 2. Operational, Max stroke vs. Screen Displacement.

REFERENCES

1. Evreinova, T. V., Evreinov, G., and Raisamo, R. From
Kinesthetic Sense to New Interaction Concepts:
Feasibility and Constraints, Int’l Journal of Advanced
Computer Technology, vol. 3, no. 4, 2014, pp. 1-33,.
2. Kaye, J. J., Sawtooth Planar Waves for Haptic
Feedback, in Adj. Proc. Of 25th UIST Conf. ACM, 2012,
pp. 5-6.
3. Levesque, V. et. al. Enhancing Physicality in Touch
Interaction with Programmable Friction, in Proc. of
SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI 2011, pp. 2481-2490.

Figure 3. Force generated vs applied power to all 4 actuators.

4. Perlin, K., Rosenfeld D. A., Kollin S. J. Manipulation of
Objects. US Patent 8,725,292B2, May, 2014.
5. Roudaunt, A., et. al. Gesture Output: Eyes-Free Output
Using a Force Feedback Touch Surface. CHI 2013,
ACM, pp. 2547-2556.
6. Reznik, D., Canny, J. A flat rigit plate is a universal
plannar manipulator, in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Robotics
and Automation, vol 2, 1998, pp. 1471-1477.

Figure 4. Stylus speed (Avg. over a 10cm) vs the delay

We measured the horizontal displacement (using a
MicroSense 5810 sensor and a 5622-LR, 20 kHz probe), the
force transfer to the stylus, as well as the speed of the stylus
(averaged over 10cm), and compared it to each actuators’
stroke and power consumption. The results showed that
actuators which were able to generate larger displacements
of the screen overlay with minimum power consumption
were the most efficient as generating stick-slip movement
of the stylus. To evaluate the usability of the SKDS we
developed a graphical application where participants
retraced different characters and shapes. The application
matched the user input to the original shape / character and
evaluated their discordances. If the deviation exceeded the
acceptable error threshold, the SKDS forced the stylus to
move in the correct direction, providing the participants
with kinesthetic feedback. In a user test, 25 participants

7. Saga, S., Raskar, R. Simultaneous Geometry and
Texture Display based on Lateral Force for touchscreen.
IEEE World Haptics Conf., Korea, 2013, pp. 437-442.
8. Wineld, L., Glassmire, J., Colgate, J, Peshkin, M. TPaD: Tactile Pattern Display through Variable Friction
Reduction, EuroHaptics Conf., Symp. On Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment & Teleoperator
Systems, World Haptics, 2007, pp. 421-426.
9. Zhang, Z. M., Li, Q., An, J. W., and Zhang, W. J.
Piezoelectric friction-inertia actuator—a critical review
and future perspective, Int’l Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, vol. 62, 2012, pp. 669-685

180

