Thermocons: Evaluating the
Thermal Haptic Perception of the Forehead
Roshan Lalintha Peiris, Liwei Chan, Kouta Minamizawa
Keio University Graduate School of Media Design
roshan, liwei, kouta @kmd.keio.ac.jp
ABSTRACT
Headband Fp2

Thermocons describes our work in progress for evaluating thermal haptic feedback on the forehead as a viable
feedback modality for integration with head mounted devices. The purpose was to identify the thermal perception for simultaneous feedback at three locations of the
forehead. We provided hot-only, cold-only and hot/coldmixed thermal stimulations at these location to identify
the sensitivity for accurate perception. Our evaluation
with 9 participants indicated that perceiving cold-only
stimulations were significantly better with an accuracy of
88%. The perception accuracy for hot-only and hotcoldmixed stimulations were 66% and 65% respectively.

FpZ

Headband

Fp1

Peltier
Elements

Peltier
Elements

Control Software

a

b

Figure 1. (a) The Fp1, Fp2 and FpZ locations (standard
EEG 10-20 system) for thermal stimulation (b) Experimental Setup and the control software used by the experimenter.

with head worn devices such as head mounted displays.
Therefore, the objective of this research is to identify
the perception accuracy of multiple simultaneous feedback with thermal stimulus on the forehead.

Author Keywords

thermal haptics; head; forehead; haptics
ACM Classification Keywords

EVALUATING THERMAL STIMULUS ON THE FOREHEAD

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g.
HCI): User Interfaces

Stimulus Locations

Our approach investigates three locations on the forehead for simultaneous stimulation. The three locations
on the forehead were determined by following the 10-20
system of electrode placement used for high-density electroencephalography (EEG) studies. We chose the Fp1,
Fp2 and FpZ (Figure 1(a)) locations that are placed on
the forehead.

INTRODUCTION

The rise in the use of head mounted displays and eyewear
devices presents an opportunity to embody haptic feedback with such devices. Their placement on the head
allows us to explore the head as a suitable location to
provide haptic feedback. Recent research has explored
using vibrotactile actuators as a viable channel for haptic feedback on the head [1, 4]. However, these investigations indicate that the perception accuracy of multiple
simultaneous feedback for vibrotactile feedback reduced
significantly as two or more actuators were actuated [1,
4].

Apparatus and Temperatures

We used three 2cmX1.5cm peltier elements1 placed on
the forehead using a headband. Figure 1(b) denotes the
setup. A custom software was used to enter the stimulus
states and collect data. To provide the stimuli, starting
from the skin temperature ( approx. 370 C), a +30 C as
the hot stimulus and a -30 C as the cold stimulus was
provided for within a second for each. This 30 C/s rate
of stimulation is sufficient for detection of a temperature change on the skin [3]. After each stimuli, the temperature was allowed to return to the skin temperature
monitored by the experimenter.

Thermal haptic feedback is another viable modality for
providing feedback. Furthermore, the head has the highest density of thermoreceptors on the human body [2].
Therefore, the forehead is a potential location to introduce thermal feedback integrated with head worn devices. In addition, the forehead provides direct contact

Experimental Design

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984762

The main objectives of this research is to identify the
perception accuracy of multiple simultaneous feedback
with thermal stimulus on the forehead. Multiple simultaneous feedback stimuli allows more information to be
1

187

http://www.kelk.co.jp/english/thermo/index.html

100%

mixed at 64.92% (SD 5%). The results show a significantly high accuracy for cold-only thermal stimulation
perception. According to the results of one-way RMANOVA with Greenhouse-Geisser correction, there exists an significance between the conditions ((F(1.171,
22.257) = 21.032, p <0.0005)); Cold stimuli is significantly better than hot and mixed stimuli (both p
<0.0001). However, there exists no significance between
hot-only and mixed stimuli.

90%

Perception Accuracy

80%
70%
60%
50%

88.89%

40%
30%

66.03%

64.92%

20%
10%

This result can be explained by the fact that afferent
fibers of cold thermoreceptors conduct faster than warm
afferent fibers [3]. In addition, it is reported that when
a temperature change occurs closer to the pain threshold (above 450 C for hot and below 150 C cold) the skin
adoption is faster [3]. Therefore since our hot stimulations were closer to the pain threoshold the quick adoption could confuse the perception for the user. This was
observed in the mixed instance as well which needs further analysis and verification. However, for the current
setup, cold thermal haptic feedback proved to be better
for simultaneous stimulation for haptic feedback. As our
future works, we wish to explore thermal stimuli on the
head with temporal stimulations and expand to other
locations such as the ear. In addition, we wish to explore new applications that can enhance the experience
for head mounted displays.

0%
Hot-only

Cold-only

Hot/Cold Mixed

Figure 2. Accuracy of Perception for Hot-only, Cold-only
and Hot/Cold Mixed Stimulations.

presented within a single feedback instance. We consider
the forehead as it provides an unhindered contact to the
thermal stimulus.
We evaluated the thermal perception under three feedback conditions. For each condition, the stimuli were
provided simultaneously at each location. The stimuli locations were randomized. The feedback conditions were
counter-balanced.
Hot Only Condition: In this condition, only hot stimuli (+30 C) were provided at the three stimulus locations.
Therefore, for each condition, each of the stimulus locations could be hot or no change and each of these conditions were repeated 5 times. The condition of where
all locations have no-change is not presented as it is the
starting state.

CONCLUSION

This research explores the presentation of thermal stimuli on the forehead. We provided hot-only, cold-only
and hot/cold mixed stimuli on three locations of the forehead. Our evaluations with 9 participants indicated that
cold-only thermal stimulation was best perceived during
simultaneous thermal stimulations.

Cold Only Condition: This condition is similar to
the Hot Only condition, but only cold (-30 C) stimuli are
provided.
Mixed Condition: This condition introduces mixed
hot/cold mixed stimuli. That is, for example, a stimuli
could include Hot at FP1, Cold at FP2 and Hot FPZ.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Procedure

REFERENCES

9 healthy participants (7 male, average age 31) took part
in the experiment held at 240 C room temperature. Initially, the stimulus locations were adjusted according to
their head size and the headband was placed on their
head. The participant was explained of the three feedback conditions and were given example stimulations of
different conditions. Before each condition of the experiment, the participants were informed of the feedback
condition they were evaluated. When a participant was
provided a stimulus, they voiced out the perceived stimulus (“Hot”, “Cold” or “No Change”) for each location
from left to right which was entered by the experimenter.
A response where all three percieved stimuli matched the
provided three stimuli was considered as an accurate response.

1. Dobrzynski, M. K., Mejri, S., Wischmann, S., and
Floreano, D. Quantifying information transfer
through a head-attached vibrotactile display:
Principles for design and control. IEEE Trans. on
Biomedical Engineering 59, 7 (2012), 2011–2018.

This research was conducted as part of the JST-ACCEL
“Embodied Media” project.

2. Green, B. G., and Cruz, A. ”Warmth-insensitive
fields”: evidence of sparse and irregular innervation
of human skin by the warmth sense. Somatosens
Mot Res 15, 4 (1998), 269–275.
3. Jones, L. A., and Ho, H. N. Warm or cool, large or
small? the challenge of thermal displays. IEEE
Transactions on Haptics 1, 1 (2008), 53–70.
4. pakov, O., Rantala, J., and Isokoski, P. Sequential
and simultaneous tactile stimulation with multiple
actuators on head, neck and back for gaze cuing. In
World Haptics Conference (WHC), 2015 IEEE
(2015), 333–338.

RESULTS DISCUSSION

Figure 2 denotes the perception accuracy results for hotonly at 66% (SD 5%), cold-only at 88.8% (SD 6%) and

188

