Sidetap & Slingshot Gestures on Unmodified Smartwatches
Hui-Shyong Yeo 1
hsy@st-andrews.ac.uk
1

Juyoung Lee 2
ejuyoung@kaist.ac.kr

Andrea Bianchi 3
andrea@kaist.ac.kr

Aaron Quigley 1
aquigley@acm.org

School of Computer Science, University of St Andrews, Scotland, United Kingdom
2
Graduate School of Culture Technology, KAIST, Republic of Korea
3
Department of Industrial Design, KAIST, Republic of Korea

ABSTRACT

We present a technique for detecting gestures on the edge of
an unmodified smartwatch. We demonstrate two exemplary
gestures, i) Sidetap - tapping on any side and ii) Slingshot pressing on the edge and then releasing quickly. Our technique is lightweight, as it relies on measuring the data from
the internal Inertial measurement unit (IMU) only. With these
two gestures, we expand the input expressiveness of a smartwatch, allowing users to use intuitive gestures with natural
tactile feedback, e.g., for the rapid navigation of a long list of
items with a tap, or act as shortcut commands to launch applications. It can also allow for eyes-free interaction or subtle
interaction where visual attention is not available.

Figure 1. Side tapping on both circular and square watches. The blue
bar shows the direction of force applied.

Author Keywords

Smartwatches; tapping gesture; sidetap; slingshot
Figure 2. Slingshot in action (1) not touching (2) pressing down (3) quick
release. The green bar shows the direction of shot.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation: User interfaces - Input devices and strategies

on wearable devices with limited computing resources. Finally, we demonstrate the implementation of our prototype
on a square and a circular Android smartwatch.

INTRODUCTION

Wrist-worn wearables such as smartwatches and fitness trackers are of increasing interest in both research and commercial deployment. However, such devices rely on small touch
screens or a few physical buttons for interaction. This can be
difficult for the user due to the limited input expressiveness
and the requirement for direct sight and visual attention.

RELATED WORK

Previous research has attempted to extend smartwatch interaction to support in-air [6], around device [2, 4] and mechanical [5, 7] gesture, which each typically require hardware modification. Xiao et al. [7] and SkinWatch [5] enhance the interaction by supporting tilt, twist and pan on the watchface with
joysticks or photo-reflective sensors. EdgeSense [4], SkinButtons [2] and zSense [6] expand the input area to the side
of the watch, skin surface beside the watch and mid-air area
around the watch, using capacitive or infrared sensors.

Here, we propose a new technique for detecting i) Sidetap and
ii) Slingshot gestures, which are i) tapping on any side and ii)
pressing on the edge and then releasing quickly. These two
simple gestures allow us to expand the input expressiveness of
wristworn devices beyond screen or button input. In addition,
by focusing on “interaction on the edge”, we allow for eyesfree interaction where visual attention is not available.

There are also approaches [3, 8] that are able to infer side or
back tapping motion on the device without requiring external hardware. However, these have only been demonstrated
on a smartphone, not on smartwatch, as these methods [3, 8]
rely on machine learning to classify the tap, which might be
difficult for wearables with limited computing resources.

Our contribution is a simple, yet effective detection technique, which does not rely on classification methods that are
computationally expensive such as machine learning or template matching. We employ only the built-in IMU data directly, thus making our technique suitable for deployment

DESIGNING SIDETAP AND SLINGSHOT

Our gesture design is motivated by five goals: i) No hardware
or modification required. ii) Low processing requirement for
running on smartwatch natively. iii) Accurate detection and
robust to false triggering. iv) Intuitive and natural tactile feedback. v) Support for eyes-free interaction. The end result is
Sidetap & Slingshot which support tapping and quick release
gestures from all 8 directions (4 corners and on 4 edges).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, japan.
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984763

189

Figure 3. A Sidetap or Slingshot gesture causes spike in the acceleration
and microphone input, which can be extracted via peak detector. Note
the difference between the two gestures - the rotation value changes before impact (sidetap) or after impact (slingshot).

Figure 4. Example: (top) file explorer (bottom) shortcut and angry bird.

CONCLUSION, LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK

We presented a new technique for detecting Sidetap & Slingshot gestures on unmodified smartwatches. Our technique
is lightweight yet effective, using only the built-in IMU data
without heavy processing such as machine learning.

Working Principle

Wristworn devices are typically held in place by a strap to
areas of human skin. Both the elasticity of human skin and
any strap act to return the device to its original position (akin
to RubberEdge [1]), when they encounter a light force.

In current prototype, there are still some miss triggering. To
reduce false triggering due to unintentional arm movement,
we use a high threshold for the peak detection, thus requiring a strong tap from the user to register as input. This is a
trade-off, as reducing threshold reduces miss triggering but
increases false triggering, and vice-versa. Because there is
only a single microphone embedded in the watch, the amplitude of microphone input is also different when tapping from
different side (e.g., right side is higher on Gear Live).

As a result of these two key characteristics, when a watchface
is hit or tapped from one direction, it will move in the opposite direction, tilting the watchface slightly. By measuring
this subtle change in the orientation value, we can determine
the opposite direction of the applied force. In addition, when
a tap or quick release occurs, there exist a sharp peak in both
the acceleration data and microphone input amplitude.

In future work, we aim to improve the robustness and then
perform a thorough user study to evaluate the system. Furthermore, instead of binary state detection (tap or not tap),
we aim to detect the pressure level and the impact force.

Implementation

We implemented a prototype on two unmodified Android
smartwatches (Samsung Gear Live and LG Urbane), using
Android Wear SDK, as shown in Figure 1 and 2. Linear acceleration and a rotation vector of the watch is polled at about
100Hz while microphone input is sampled at 16kHz.

REFERENCES

1. Casiez, G., Vogel, D., Pan, Q., and Chaillou, C.
Rubberedge: Reducing clutching by combining position
and rate control with elastic feedback. In UIST ’07,

The changes in rotation vector (Figure 3 right) before and after trigger are measured and converted to x-y coordinate linearly. This is used to determine the direction and which gesture. For Sidetap, the rotation changes after impact while for
Slingshot, the rotation changes before impact. A short delay
is used because the IMU data is very noisy during impact.

2. Laput, G., Xiao, R., Chen, X. A., Hudson, S. E., and
Harrison, C. Skin buttons: Cheap, small, low-powered
and clickable fixed-icon laser projectors. In UIST ’14,
3. McGrath, W., and Li, Y. Detecting tapping motion on the
side of mobile devices by probabilistically combining
hand postures. In UIST ’14,

In addition, we need a robust way to trigger the gesture detection. Unfortunately, the side/rim of current smartwatches
is not touch sensitive. After some experiments, we chose to
employ a sensor fusion approach of detecting a sharp peak in
both the acceleration and microphone input, as shown in Figure 3 left. This has proved to be quite robust. In addition, to
avoid falsely triggering, the following heuristics are used - i)
orientation of the watch should not fluctuate beyond a small
threshold during or before the trigger (due to unintentional
arm movement). ii) when microphone input is too loud (due
to background noises or speaking), fall back to using linear
acceleration peak only.

4. Oakley, I., and Lee, D. Interaction on the edge: Offset
sensing for small devices. In CHI ’14,
5. Ogata, M., and Imai, M. Skinwatch: Skin gesture
interaction for smart watch. In AH ’15,
6. Withana, A., Peiris, R., Samarasekara, N., and
Nanayakkara, S. zsense: Enabling shallow depth gesture
recognition for greater input expressivity on smart
wearables. In CHI ’15,
7. Xiao, R., Laput, G., and Harrison, C. Expanding the input
expressivity of smartwatches with mechanical pan, twist,
tilt and click. In CHI ’14,

EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS

In a file explorer (Figure 4) with a long list of items, a
top/bottom tap can skip to the first/last item. Sidetap gesture
also allows shortcut command, e.g., left tap to start a timer
or right tap to start a music player. Slingshot is particularly
suitable for gaming purposes such as the “Angry bird” game
(Figure 4), because of the realistic and natural feedback.

8. Zhang, C., Guo, A., Zhang, D., Southern, C., Arriaga, R.,
and Abowd, G. Beyondtouch: Extending the input
language with built-in sensors on commodity
smartphones. In IUI ’15,

190

