Estimating Contact Force of Fingertip
and Providing Tactile Feedback Simultaneously
Nobuhiro Funato
Tokai University
4-1-1 Kitakaname, Hiratsuka-shi, Kanagawa
259-1292, Japan
3bda2109@mail.u-tokai.ac.jp

Kentaro Takemura
Tokai University
4-1-1 Kitakaname, Hiratsuka-shi, Kanagawa
259-1292, Japan
takemura@tokai.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

This study proposes a method for estimating the contact force
of the fingertip by inputting vibrations actively. The use of
active bone-conducted sound sensing has been limited to estimating the joint angle of the elbow and the finger. We applied it to the method for estimating the contact force of the
fingertip. Unlike related works, it is not necessary to mount
the device on a fingertip, and tactile feedback is enabled using
tangible vibrations.
Author Keywords

Active Sensing; Contact Force; Vibration; Haptic Interface

Figure 1. Estimating the contact force of the index finger. The contact
force is visualized as the elevation of a 3D surface.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. User Interfaces: Input devices and strategies; B.4.2.
Input/Output Devices: Channels and controllers

Currently, our implementation can only estimate the z-axis
contact force. At the same time, this system affords the advantage of being able to sense the contact force and provide
tactile feedback simultaneously.

INTRODUCTION

Various methods have been studied for estimating the contact
force of the fingertip. A representative approach is to sense
the variation of the nail color. Mascaro et al.[?] proposed a
method for determining the three-dimensional contact force
of the fingertip using a photodetector attached to the nail.
Recently, Ono et al.[?] proposed a method for sensing the
touch force using active acoustic sensing without a wearable
device. The touch force can be estimated using an estimation model of each target object. These devices have enabled
the usability of product packaging and stationery to be evaluated. The contact force can be expected to be widely used
in various areas. However, the above methods suffer from
some limitations such as the need to attach a device to the
fingertip and to create an estimation model for each target object. These limitations must be overcome to use information
about the contact force in daily life. In our previous studies,
we proposed a method for determining the joint angle based
on active bone-conducted sound sensing[?], with an actuator
and a sensor arranged at a point distant from the measurement object. This enabled the contact force to be estimated.

ESTIMATING CONTACT FORCE OF FINGERTIP USING
ACTIVE BONE-CONDUCTED SOUND SENSING

In active bone-conducted sound sensing, an actuator is used to
produce vibrations in the bone, and the joint angles of the finger and elbow are estimated using the amplitude of the propagated vibration. The frequency of the inputted wave is around
1000 Hz, because we avoid using frequencies perceptible by
the tactile receptor. Figure 1 shows the result of estimating
the contact force of the index finger, and the elevation of the
3D surface on the display shows the value of the contact force
when a subject touches anywhere.
In our previous studies, we estimated the joint angle using
propagated vibrations. Based on various experiments, we presumed that the dominant cause of variation is the condition of
the articulating part. Therefore, the propagated vibration will
likely vary when the contact force of the finger changes. In
this study, we attached a contact microphone and a vibration
actuator to the middle and proximal phalanx, respectively, as
shown in Figure 2. For estimating the contact force, the relationship between the contact force and the amplitude of the
inputted vibration must be recorded for calibration. When
a subject pressed the force sensor, we measured the amplitude of the vibration and the contact force. The relationship
between the amplitude and the contact force was linear, as
shown in Figure 2, and linear regression can be performed by

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984766

195

Vibration actuator

Force sensor

Average error of contact force [N]

Amplitude of vibration[V]

0.35

Contact microphone

0.3
0.25
0.2

0.15
0.1
0.05
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Contact force[N]

Figure 2. Calibration for estimating the contact force of a fingertip. Left:
The calibration device consists of a force sensor. Right: Relationship
between the amplitude of the vibration and the contact force of the index
finger.

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

SubjectA

SubjectB

SubjectC

All Subjects

Figure 4. Average error of the estimated contact force.
8
Providing feedback

Estimated value
Ground Truth

8

7

Estimated value

Target of contact force

Contact force [N]

Contact force [N]

6

6

4

5
4
3

2
2
1

0
0

5

10

15

0

20

0

Time [sec]

5

10

15

20

Time [sec]

Figure 3. Comparison result of the estimated contact force and the
ground truth.

Figure 5. Result of estimating the contact force of the fingertip and providing feedback simultaneously.

the least squares method. When the amplitude of the vibration is measured, we can compute the contact force using the
model computed by linear regression.

that we can estimate the contact force by providing tactile
feedback.
CONCLUSION

This study proposes a method for estimating the contact force
based on active bone-conducted sound sensing. We could
estimate the contact force anywhere using a wearable device. When the contact force was larger than a threshold,
tactile feedback could be provided using perceptible vibrations. Currently, only the contact force in the z-axis can be
estimated. Therefore, in a future study, we will try to estimate the three-dimensional contact force.

EVALUATION EXPERIMENTS
Experimental results of estimating contact force

Evaluation experiments were conducted for three trial subjects. Each subject pressed the force sensor three times for
calibration. Then, each subject pressed the force sensor three
times within 20 s for the evaluation, and we measured the
amplitude of the vibration and the ground truth.
Figure 3 shows the comparison results of the estimated contact force of the fingertip and the ground truth obtained using
the force sensor. We confirmed that the contact force can be
estimated continuously when a user pressed and released the
fingertip. Errors were caused when the relationship between
the amplitude of the vibration and the contact force did not
hold on account of the user pressing the fingertip strongly.
Figure 4 shows the average error of the estimated contact
force. The average errors of all subjects were smaller than
1 N, and we confirmed that our proposed method has performance comparable to those of related works.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by the MIC/SCOPE
#162103009.
REFERENCES

1. S. A. Mascaro and others. 2001. Photoplethysmograph
fingernail sensors for measuring finger forces without
haptic obstruction. IEEE Trans. on Robotics and
Automation 17, 5 (2001), 698–708. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/70.964669

2. Makoto Ono and others. 2015. Sensing Touch Force
Using Active Acoustic Sensing. In Proc. of the Ninth
Int. Conf. on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied
Interaction. 355–358. DOI:

Experimental result of estimating contact force with tactile feedback

The advantage of the proposed method is that it enables tactile feedback. In another experiment, when the contact force
was around 6 N, a tangible vibration of around 200 Hz was
provided by switching the inputted frequency rapidly. Additionally, we directed a subject to stop pressing when tactile
feedback is provided. As shown in Figure 5, the subject stop
pressing when the force was around 6 N, and we confirmed

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2677199.2680585

3. Kentaro Takemura and others. 2011. Active
Bone-conducted Sound Sensing for Wearable Interfaces.
In Proc. of the 24th Annual ACM Symp. Adjunct on User
Interface Software and Technology. ACM, 53–54. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2046396.2046419

196

