WithYou: An Interactive Shadowing Coach with Speech
Recognition
Xinlei Zhang
Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
xinleizhang@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp

Takashi Miyaki
Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
miyaki@acm.org

Jun Rekimoto
Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo /
Sony CSL
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
rekimoto@acm.org

ABSTRACT

Speech shadowing, in which the subject listens to native narration sound and tries to repeat it immediately while listening, is a proven way of practicing speaking skills when learning foreign languages. However, since the narration is independent of user’s speech, the playback cannot make an adjustment when the learner fails to catch up, and this makes
shadowing difficult. We propose WithYou, a system based on
Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) that is able to adjust
narration playback during a live shadowing speech. WithYou
compares the student’s live speech with the narration playback to detect shadowing mistakes. In addition, WithYou
is able to handle pauses and recognize repetitive phrases in
shadowing practice. A user study shows that practicing shadowing with WithYou is easier and more effective compared
with conventional methods.

Figure 1. Demonstration of WithYou. When the difference of these two
progress indicators cross the pre-defined threshold, the narration will be
rewinded to the last punctuation.

However, in shadowing practice, it is common that students
fail in catching up with the narration because of mispronunciation or misarticulation. In this situation, students can do
nothing but restart the playback from the top because the narration is not aware of the student’s performance, and thus cannot make playback adjustments when they fail.

Author Keywords

Computer-Assisted Language Learning; Speaking Support;
Speech Recognition; Shadowing; Voice Interface

We propose WithYou, a shadowing support system which is
capable of adjusting the narration playback based on user’s
speech progress in real-time. WithYou tracks user’s speech
on-the-go and compares it with the word that is being played.
If there is a huge distance (over the transcription) between
the two, which indicates mispronunciation or user’s failing
behind the narration, then the playback is automatically rewound to the last punctuation that is near to the user’s mistake.

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation: Voice I/O
INTRODUCTION

Mastering speaking skill in a second language is essential to
communicate with others in international situations.
A typical way for students to practice speaking skill is listening to native speaker’s narrations and then repeat word by
word while listening – an approach that is commonly referred
as shadowing. By doing this, it has been reported that second
language (L2) learners can expect great improvement in their
general language ability, especially in listening [2] and speaking skills [5].

In addition, WithYou is capable of dealing with pauses and
recognizing repetitive phrases in a learner’s speech. This has
made the recognition robust, and can ensure that the feedback
it provides is timely. As a result, WithYou can improve shadowing efficiency by eliminating unnecessary user operation
and providing fast recovery from shadowing mistakes.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985704

To practice shadowing using WithYou, learner prepares a narration sound file and its transcription as the template for learning.
As demonstrated in Figure 2, in WithYou, speech recognition
is used to track user’s speech. To do that, 1st-pass recogni-

61

Your	

time	

10ms 	

owing performance. Moreover, users with relatively low
shadowing performance before practicing improved to a
higher extent than those with high initial shadowing performance. In addition, among all the users who improved their
shadowing performance by all the three methods, those who
practiced with WithYou improved more.

is	

20ms 	

We also did a subjective evaluation on the system’s usability
and shadowing difficulty with these three systems. The result
shows that compared with the conventional method, shadowing with WithYou is easier and its UI is highly preferred over
the conventional one.

…	
“Your time …”	

RELATED WORK

Automated Speech Recognition (ASR) has been adopted for
language learning support in many works. One typical ASR
application for language learning support is pronunciation
training [7, 1, 11, 9]. Typical examples under this direction
include LISTEN [10] – a reading tutor system that listens to a
child reading sentences, and then evaluate their pronunciation
over specific words. Another example is CALL Mandarin [3],
which visualizes speech signal as well as the fundamental frequency (F0) contour in real-time for pronunciation training.

Figure 2. System Architecture.

tion in “Julius” [6] is adopted. The transcription is converted
to a grammar file to restrict the recognizer to recognize only
the words contained in the transcription. To ensure recognition robustness, an acoustic model that represents “silence” in
speech is added to the grammar file at places that correspond
to punctuations in the transcription. As the result, WithYou
is able to recognize live shadowing speech which contains
repeating phrases and pauses with high recognition rate in
real-time.

Another kind of application aims to build a system that enables users to have conversations with computer virtually,
such as SPELL [4], a system that provides a specific teaching
mode for pronunciation training such as intonation or vowel
quality.

On the other hand, WithYou monitors playback progress as
the “correct answer” to refer to. To do that, the system first
aligns the transcribed text with the narration sound, identifying which time segments in the speech data correspond to particular words in the transcription data. Then, during practice,
system use this “word-timing” mapping to control narration
playback on a word basis.

There are also works that focus on pronunciation evaluation
for shadowing [8]. However, this evaluation method works
off-line and it does not provide instructions on how to improve pronunciation for each word in real-time.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We proposed WithYou, a shadowing support system that uses
speech recognition to track user’s speech in real-time and then
adapts the narration sound playback to the user’s speech during shadowing practice. Our user study shows that WithYou
is capable of helping users, especially those with relatively
low shadowing performance improve learning efficiency by
making shadowing easier to do.

In WithYou, distance (over the transcription) between the
user’s real-time speech and the narration playback is used to
determine shadowing mistakes. We set a distance threshold
to determine shadowing mistakes. If the distance between
sound playback and the user’s speech is equal or higher than
the threshold, then the situation is judged as “shadowing failure” and the narration will be rewound back. Otherwise, the
narration sound will keep playing as the user is following the
narration well. The default threshold for determining shadowing mistakes is set to five words, which is concluded from a
preliminary experiment that measured the distance when participants make mistakes.

For future improvements, we plan to add real-time error visualization into the system because sometimes it is difficult
for users to pinpoint mistakes with only sound feedbacks.
Moreover, we plan to provide targeted ability training, such as
“pronunciation only” or “rhythm only” with configurable difficulty so that users with different language ability can have
targeted support with WithYou.

FINDINGS

To evaluate the system, we recruited seven graduate nonnative users to practice shadowing with three different methods in randomized order. The three methods are conventional
shadowing, WithYou and a manual version of WithYou which
provides a key for users to rewind the playback to the last
punctuation when they make mistakes.

REFERENCES

1. Eskenazi, M., Kennedy, A., Ketchum, C., Olszewski, R.,
and Pelton, G. The native accent pronunciation tutor:
measuring success in the real world. In SLaTE (2007),
124–127.

By measuring their before-practice and after-practice shadowing performance, we found that compared with the conventional method, WithYou helps more people improve shad-

2. Hamada, Y. The effectiveness of pre-and
post-shadowing in improving listening comprehension
skills. LANGUAGE TEACHER 38 (2014), 4.

62

3. Hansjrg, M., and Hussein, H. CALL mandarin-results
and conclusions from a project for developing a
computer-assisted pronunciation training program.
Systemtheorie, Signalverarbeitung, Sprachtechnogie.
TUD Press (2013).
4. Hiller, S., Rooney, E., Laver, J., and Jack, M. Spell: An
automated system for computer-aided pronunciation
teaching. Speech Communication 13, 3 (1993), 463–473.
5. Hori, T. Exploring shadowing as a method of English
pronunciation training. PhD thesis, kwansei gakuin
university, 2008.
6. Lee, A., Kawahara, T., and Shikano, K. Julius—an open
source real-time large vocabulary recognition engine. In
EUROSPEECH2001: the 7th European Conference on
Speech Communication and Technology (2001).
7. Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, J., Lee, K., and Lee, G. Postech
approaches for dialog-based english conversation
tutoring. Proc. APSIPA ASC (2010), 794–803.

8. Luo, D., Shimomura, N., Minematsu, N., Yamauchi, Y.,
and Hirose, K. Automatic pronunciation evaluation of
language learners’ utterances generated through
shadowing. In INTERSPEECH (2008), 2807–2810.
9. Meng, H., Lo, W.-K., Harrison, A. M., Lee, P., Wong,
K.-H., Leung, W.-K., and Meng, F. Development of
automatic speech recognition and synthesis technologies
to support chinese learners of english: The cuhk
experience. Proc. APSIPA ASC (2010), 811–820.
10. Mostow, J., et al. Giving help and praise in a reading
tutor with imperfect listening–because automated speech
recognition means never being able to say you’re
certain. CALICO journal 16, 3 (2013), 407–424.
11. Tsubota, Y., Kawahara, T., and Dantsuji, M. Practical
use of english pronunciation system for japanese
students in the call classroom. In Proc. ICSLP, vol. 15
(2004), 1689–1692.

63

