SoEs: Attachable Augmented Haptic on Gaming Controller
for Immersive Interaction
Kong-Chang Lee
Ping-Hsuan Han*
Jui-Chun Hsiao*
‡
*
Chien-Hsing Chou
Kuan-Yin Lu
Yi-Ping Hung*
*
National Taiwan University
‡
Tamkang University
{yeti0193275, pinghsuan.han}@gmail.com
hung@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Yang-Sheng Chen*
Chiao-En Hsieh*

‡

Figure 1. Scenarios of multisensory interactive gameplay through immersive gaming controller
ABSTRACT

To provide a various and low-cost haptic feedback device
for game makers, many works have influenced our
prototyping. Birdly [1] creates a vivid full-body experience
of flying by using a motion platform and a wind-feedback
system. Like most of motion platform, they could provide a
whole body haptic experience, but the device is expensive.
Haptic Turk [2] is another kind of motion platform based on
few people, which do not have any cost for machinery, but
it could provide similar experiences of haptic feedback.
Although these approach have been successful at whole
body haptic experience, however, they are not suitable for
recreating the touch-related experience.
Therefore, prop-based feedback system could consider
another usage. Annexing Reality [3] and Haptic Retargeting
[4] provide a prop-based feedback for virtual object. Both
design only provide a static tangible interface for user
which use real physical object to simulate the tactile
sensation of the virtual object. Additionally, OoEs [5] uses
an orb-form feedback system which could provide four
kinds of active tactile sensation to simulate nature element
in the immersive game. Those works make prop-based
approaches very stationary and not universally usable.
TurkDeck [6] have shown another potential approach by
scaling prop-based virtual reality through physical labor.
This make prop-based tactile sensation more useful, which
it is fun and interesting that having a group of people for
doing this. Lopes et al. [7] proposed Impacto which uses a
wearable device to simulate the physical impact by
combing tactile stimulation with electrical muscle
stimulation. Po2 [8] uses gloves to provide an illusion
tactile feedback between hands. Although both wearable
devices can provide augmented haptic in the immersive
virtual reality, player has to wear something which is not
usually wear it.

We present SoEs (Sword of Elements), an attachable
augmented haptic device for enhancing gaming controller
in the immersive first-person game. Generally, Player can
easily receive visual and auditory feedback through headmounted displays (HMD) and headphones from first-person
perspective in virtual world. However, the tactile feedback
is less than those feedbacks in immersive environment.
Although gaming controller, i.e. VIVE or Oculus controller,
can provide tactile feedback by some vibration sensors, the
haptic feedback is more complicated and various, it
includes kinesthesia and cutaneous feedback. Our key idea
is to provide a low-cost approach to simulate the haptic
feedback of player manipulation in the immersive
environment such as striking while the iron is hot which the
player could feel the heat and reaction force. Eventually,
the game makers could utilize the attachable device into
their games for providing haptic feedback.
Author Keywords

Augmented Haptic; Haptic Feedback; Immersive Game;
Game Controller; Virtual Reality.
INTRODUCTION

Virtual Reality (VR) is an emerging field due to its
powerful immersive feeling. To enhance the player
experience in immersive game in the state of art, haptic
feedback is one of the key feedback.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985707

71

In this work, we present an attachable augmented haptic
device for enhancing gaming controller, which is usually
included in a HMD set.

iron into a water sink which could feel the vapour from the
water sink, and polishing the iron on the grinding wheel
which could feel the vibration and the continues of reaction
force. In the second phase, we design two action for player.
When player pulling an arrow back on his longbow, he
could receive the continues of reaction force. Then, when
player releasing the arrow from his hand, he could receive a
small wind caused by the arrow flying to the target.

IMPLEMENTATION

The hardware design of SoEs is shown on Figure2. The
concept of the device is to design an attachable case for an
immersive gaming controller, which is wireless and provide
the position tracking of the controller. Therefore, in this
implementation, we choice Vive to be our HMD sets,
because they already include a gaming controller with
position tracking. For combining both multiple haptic
feedback and remote-controlled function, SoEs mainly
consists of four parts of hardware modules on an attachable
case: (1) Arduino Nano, (2) multiple tactile modules, (3)
Bluetooth and (4) 12V Battery. Beside the build-in
vibration sensor in Vive controller, for providing a
multisensory interactive gameplay, we combine other three
modules (Figure 2). So, the player can receive the related
haptic when they playing in the immersive game through
four kinds of tactile sensation. To integrate all of the details
described above, we use Unity 5 to be our game engine.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this work, we provide an attachable solution to enhance
the player experience in the immersive game with
augmented haptic. Through attaching SoEs on the gaming
controllers, player can receive wind, thermal and
centrifugal force feedback additionally. Furthermore,
applying the concept presented in this work also could be
used in other interactive gameplay. Our future work will
gather the user feedback to inform researchers, game
makers and practitioners the playful uses of this technology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part by the Ministry of
Science and Technology of Taiwan under the grant MOST
104-2221-E-002-050-MY3, and by NTU IoX Center under
the grant NTU-105R104045 and MOST105-2633-E002001.
REFERENCES

1. Rheiner, Max. "Birdly an attempt to fly." ACM
SIGGRAPH ‘14 Emerging Technologies. ACM, 2014.
2. Cheng, Lung-Pan, et al. "Haptic turk: a motion platform
based on people." In Proc. ACM CHI ’14.
3. Hettiarachchi, Anuruddha, and Daniel Wigdor.
"Annexing Reality: Enabling Opportunistic Use of
Everyday Objects as Tangible Proxies in Augmented
Reality." In Proc. ACM CHI ’16.

Figure 2. Hardware Design of SoEs: (a) an attachable case
on gaming controller, (b) motor module, (c) electronic fan
module and (d) thermal module.

4. Azmandian, Mahdi, et al. "Haptic Retargeting: Dynamic
Repurposing of Passive Haptics for Enhanced Virtual
Reality Experiences." In Proc. ACM CHI ’16.

APPLICATIONS: IMMERSIVE ADVENTURE GAME

5. Han, Ping-Hsuan, et al. "OoEs: Playing in the
Immersive Game with Augmented Haptics." In Proc.
ACM SIGGRAPH ’16 VR Village.

To demonstrate our device, we develop an immersive
virtual reality game with augmented haptic, which we
called “The ancient maker”. This game scene mainly uses
“The Blacksmith: Environment [9]” unitypackage, which is
a 3D model of environment. In our game, player is a
defender who need to make arrowheads and shoot the arrow
to defend the intruder, therefore, we design two phases for
player to experience the immersive interaction with
augmented haptic: (1) Making arrowheads and (2) Shooting
the intruder. In the first phase, we simulate the process of
making arrow step by step. Player will receive variant
combination of haptic feedback in the process such as
heating pieces of wrought iron into the furnace which could
feel the heat from the iron, striking while the iron is hot
which could feel the heat and reaction force, quenching the

6. Cheng, Lung-Pan, et al. "TurkDeck: Physical Virtual
Reality Based on People." In Proc. ACM UIST ’15.
7. Lopes, Pedro, Alexandra Ion, and Patrick Baudisch.
"Impacto: Simulating Physical Impact by Combining
Tactile Stimulation with Electrical Muscle
Stimulation." In Proc. ACM UIST ’15.
8. Israr, Ali, et al. "Po2: augmented haptics for interactive
gameplay." In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH’15 Emerging
Technologies (p. 21).
9. Unity. The Blacksmith. http://unity3d.com/cn/pages/theblacksmith

72

