AmbioTherm: Simulating Ambient Temperatures and Wind
Conditions in VR Environments
Nimesha Ranasinghe1 , Pravar Jain2 , David Tolley3 , Shienny Karwita4 , Shi Yilei5 , Ellen Yi-Luen Do6
Keio-NUS CUTE Center, Interactive and Digital Media Institute,
National University of Singapore
1
2
{nimesha , pravar , dtolley3 , shienny4 , ellendo6 }@nus.edu.sg, yilei@ahlab.org5
ABSTRACT

As Virtual Reality (VR) experiences become increasingly popular, simulating sensory perceptions of environmental conditions is essential for providing an immersive user experience.
In this paper, we present Ambiotherm, a wearable accessory
for existing Head Mounted Displays (HMD), which simulates
real-world environmental conditions such as ambient temperatures and wind conditions. The system consists of a wearable
accessory for the HMD and a mobile application, which generates interactive VR environments and controls the thermal
and wind stimuli. The thermal stimulation module is attached
to the user’s neck while two fans are focused on the user’s
face to simulate wind conditions. We demonstrate the Ambiotherm system with two VR environments, a desert and a snowy
mountain, to showcase the different types of ambient temperatures and wind conditions that can be simulated. Results from
initial user experiments show that the participants perceive VR
environments to be more immersive when external thermal
and wind stimuli are presented as part of the VR experience.
Figure 1. A participant is using the Ambiotherm system with a Samsung™ Gear VR HMD. The control module is attached at the back.

CCS Concepts

•Human-centered computing → Interaction paradigms;
Mixed / augmented reality; Interaction devices;

Ambiotherm is a fundamental sensory simulation technology
that can be integrated with existing VR HMDs to provide
controlled thermal and airflow sensations that can be used to
simulate ambient temperatures and wind conditions respectively in virtual environments. The novelty of this work is
not only the simulation of environmental conditions but also
the ability to deliver customized simulations with respect to
users’ perceptions of, and interactions with, the VR scene.
For example, this technology can be applied in VR sports and
related activities, such as skiing, hiking, racing or paragliding
in which the ambient temperature and winds are an essential
part of the users’ experience. As shown in Figure 1, when
using the device, virtual wind and temperature sensations are
delivered using the fans and Peltier elements. Furthermore, we
envision that this work will enable a new design space for the
VR and AR designers to integrate multisensory interactions
within simulated environments.

Author Keywords

Ambient temperature; virtual wind; virtual reality;
multimodal interaction
INTRODUCTION

The development of visual, auditory and tactile stimuli have
been the mainstream research focus in Virtual and Augmented
Reality (VR and AR) systems [3]. However, to achieve true
immersion, one of the most important aspects that is yet to
be realized in VR is the simulation of real-world environmental conditions. For example, ambient temperature and wind
characteristics of a VR environment can significantly enhance
the user’s perception of being in a real, physical space that is
being simulated in VR [1, 2].

METHOD

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985712

The Ambiotherm system consists of three main modules (as
shown in Figure 2): the control module, the ambient temperature module, and the wind simulation module. As a means of
providing controlled thermal stimulation to simulate ambient
temperatures, it utilizes two Peltier elements (for rapid heating

85

and cooling) with varying voltage and polarity applied to them.
Both of the Peltier elements are attached to heatsinks to provide efficient temperature control. This module is worn on top
of the spine behind the user’s neck. This location on the upper
body is chosen for two reasons: 1) to provide high levels of
comfort, and 2) to provide a perception of overall temperature
change (similar to the effects of induced hypothermia [4]).
Additionally, wind conditions are simulated using two 5V fans
mounted on servo motors facing the user’s cheeks. The servo
motors are used to simulate the direction of the wind, while
the technique of Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM) is used to
simulate the strength. These thermal and wind simulations are
controlled by a microcontroller that receives commands from
the VR environment via Bluetooth.

Figure 3. Normalized average rating scores received for three different
aspects of the system: perception, stimuli, and user experience (error
bars display standard error, n = 15).

through different VR environments, they will experience thermal and wind sensations that simulate real-world conditions
congruent to those displayed in the respective VR environment.
For example, as users travel through a snow environment, cool
thermal sensations and wind stimuli will be provided to simulate the coldness and cross-winds associated with this particular environment. For the user’s safety and comfort, thermal
stimuli will be restricted to an approximate range of 15◦ C 35◦ C for a maximum duration of approximately 20 seconds.
CONCLUSION

In conclusion, this paper presented Ambiotherm as a system
for simulating environmental conditions as part of VR experiences. It uses two Peltier elements, two fans, and two servo
motors to simulate ambient temperature and wind conditions
accordingly. Initial user experiments show that users perceive
greater immersion while exploring VR environments with the
Ambiotherm system. Further studies should be conducted to
refine these multisensory stimuli and to establish a taxonomy
for future VR developers to integrate simulated environmental
conditions within their VR simulations.

Figure 2. Main components of the Ambiotherm system: two fans and
servo motors are used to simulate the wind conditions, while Peltier elements are used to simulate the ambient temperatures.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

An initial user experiment was conducted with 15 participants
(8 males and 7 females with an average age of 23 years) using
a Samsung Gear VR and a Note 5 mobile phone. For the
experiment, two contrasting VR environments were developed
on the Unity platform1 : a desert and a snowy mountain. User
input controllers were not used for this experiment and the
participants were instructed to explore the VR environments
by following an animated character, which automatically navigates through the environments. Based on the environment,
the system automatically outputs hot and cold stimuli along
with various wind patterns. Two sessions were conducted
(Gear VR vs. Gear VR combined with the Ambiotherm) in
which users were asked to explore both VR environments
twice, in the sequence “desert, snow, desert, snow” (duration
of each session was approximately 4 minutes). After each
session, the participants were asked to answer a short questionnaire, which was prepared based on three aspects: perception,
stimuli, and user experience. The initial findings, as illustrated
in Figure 3, clearly show that participants prefer the Gear
VR combined with the Ambiotherm for enhanced experience
during the simulations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under its International
Research Centres in Singapore Funding Initiative.
REFERENCES

1. Leonidas Deligiannidis and Robert JK Jacob. 2006. The
VR scooter: Wind and tactile feedback improve user
performance. In 3D User Interfaces. IEEE, 143–150.
2. Felix Hülsmann, Nikita Mattar, Julia Fröhlich, and Ipke
Wachsmuth. 2014. Simulating wind and warmth in virtual
reality: conception, realization and evaluation for a cave
environment. J Virtual Real Broadcast 11, 10 (2014),
1–20.
3. Jason Jerald. 2015. The VR Book: Human-Centered
Design for Virtual Reality. Morgan & Claypool.

DEMO EXPERIENCE

During our interactive demo, participants will be provided
with various interactive VR environments. As the user travels

4. Claus Jessen. 2012. Temperature regulation in humans
and other mammals. Springer Science & Business Media,
6.

1 https://unity3d.com

86

