AquaCAVE: Augmented Swimming Environment with
Immersive Surround-Screen Virtual Reality
Shogo Yamashita
The University of Tokyo
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
shogo-yamashita@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp

Xinlei Zhang
The University of Tokyo
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
xinleizhang@g.ecc.utokyo.ac.jp

Jun Rekimoto
The University of Tokyo /
Sony CSL
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
rekimoto@acm.org

ABSTRACT

AquaCAVE is a system for enhancing the swimming experience. Although swimming is considered to be one of the
best exercises to maintain our health, swimming in a pool
is normally monotonous; thus, maintaining its motivation is
sometimes difficult. AquaCAVE is a computer-augmented
swimming pool with rear-projection acrylic walls that surround a swimmer, providing a CAVE-like immersive stereoscopic projection environment. The swimmer wears goggles
with liquid-crystal display (LCD) shutter glasses, and cameras
installed in the pool tracks swimmer’s head position. Swimmers can be immersed into synthetic scenes such as coral reefs,
outer space, or any other computer generated environments.
The system can also provide swimming training with projections such as record lines and swimming forms as 3D virtual
characters in the 3D space.

Figure 1. AquaCAVE: immersive environment for swimmers with multiple stereoscopic projections on surrounding acrylic walls

Author Keywords

Augmented Sports; Swimming; Immersive Environment;
Virtual Reality; Projection-based Systems; CAVE
INTRODUCTION

Swimming is one of the most popular sports, and there are
many benefits of swimming for maintaining physical and mental health. On the other hand, maintaining motivation to keep
swimming in a swimming pool is sometimes problematic because swimming requires a monotonous repetitive motion for
a long time. Unlike swimming in the sea, where swimmers
can enjoy the change of scenery, swimmers in a pool can only
see the bottom of the pool thus the experience tends to be
boring. In addition, learning and improving one’s swimming
form is not easy, because he/she cannot see his/her swimming
form in the water in real time.
AQUACAVE

In this research, we took a new approach in which the walls of
a swimming pool are replaced with stereoscopic rear projection panels, like a virtual reality environment with surround
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984760

183

rear-projection screens known as CAVE [1]. With this configuration, a swimmer’s entire view is surrounded by a synthetic
image and the system can display any scene, such as coral
reefs and shark cage diving. This environment should also be
helpful as a training environment for swimmers, as it can also
display information such as swimming forms and record lines.
We call this system AquaCAVE (Figure 1).

RELATED WORKS

Immersive Terrestrial Scuba Diving Using Virtual Reality [2]
is a system that provides an immersive SCUBA diving experience using VR headsets with a motion platform with their
outstretched arms and legs placed in a suspended harness.
However, providing the sensation of water was difficult since
the user is on the ground. One of the contributions of AquaCAVE is the enhancement of swimming experience by providing the realistic swimming sensation in the virtual world. The
other contribution is the improvement in the quality of swimming training. One approach is to use an underwater robot that
swims together with a swimmer and shows information with
an attached underwater display [4]. However, it is still not
possible to provide an experience in the actual sea, because
the size of the display is limited. Dungeons & swimmers [3]
is an interactive game using audio feedbacks to maintain the
motivation to swim. However, swimming training like form
correction is not feasible without visual feedbacks.

Figure 2. AquaCAVE system configuration

SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION

CONCLUTION AND FUTURE WORK

The system configuration is shown in Figure 2. The size of
the swimming pool used for this research is 3m ×2m ×1m.
Each wall is coated with a rear-projection sheet. Six ultrashort throw projectors (RICHO PJ WX4141) are used for
CAVE-like projection. Images are provided from a single Mac
Pro with six thunderbolt display ports. The swimmer just
wears his/her swimming goggles with LCD shutters to see the
stereoscopic view, and a swimming cap with visible light LED
markers tracked by cameras in the pool. Based on the obtained
head position, the view frustum for each projection panel is
calculated. Each eye position can be also estimated for the
immersive stereoscopic scenes.

We introduced AquaCAVE, a system for enhancing swimming
experience. Using a combination of CAVE-like projectionbased virtual reality with a swimming pool, swimmers can be
immersed into synthetic scenes. The system can be also used
for swimming training with projections such as record lines or
swimming forms.

We prepared two types of contents to be presented for the initial trial of the system. One was a non-stereoscopic 360-degree
spherical video of coral reefs recorded using six GoPro cameras. The captured videos were stitched together to be in
equirectangular format. With this projection, a swimmer could
feel as if he/she was swimming in that environment. We also
created an underwater computer graphics scene to check the
feasibility of stereoscopic vision in the water. Another type
of content is an ideal swimming form under the swimmer.
Motion capture data of a swimmer obtained from a motion
capture dataset is used for this purpose.
PILOT STUDY

We asked a highly trained swimmer with ten years experience
to swim in the environment. As a result, the limited space
could support a realistic swimming experience, because the
trained swimmer could stay in the same position. However,
for untrained swimmers, staying at the same position was not
easy. Moreover, this system still needs to address some water
specific issues. For instance, the effect of the optical distortion
in the water must be clear, because even slight position changes
can make errors in swimming training. In addition, reflection
and infrared radiation absorption affect the tracking accuracy.
We first tried a combination of an infrared light LED marker
and a pair of cameras. However, infrared light decays greatly
in the water, the recognizable distance between cameras and
an LED was about 40cm. Thus, we used visible light LED.
Since this system projects complicated images, accurate head
tracking should be difficult depending on the scene.

184

From some pilot studies, we noticed that AquaCAVE still
needs to address some problems regarding the limited size of
the pool and water characteristics. One possbile solution is
to attach water pumps to create a water current in the pool.
The water flow would be able to control the position of the
swimming user and give him/her an appropriate feedback in
accordance with the scene projected. Pincushion distortion in
the water should be removed by a proper camera calibration,
but further study of filtering methods for visible light head
tracking in the CAVE-like environment is required.
REFERENCES

1. Carolina Cruz-Neira, Daniel J Sandin, and Thomas A
DeFanti. 1993. Surround-screen projection-based virtual
reality: the design and implementation of the CAVE. In
Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques. ACM, 135–142.
2. Dhruv Jain, Misha Sra, Jingru Guo, Rodrigo Marques,
Raymond Wu, Justin Chiu, and Chris Schmandt. 2016.
Immersive Terrestrial Scuba Diving Using Virtual Reality.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 1563–1569.
3. Haechan Lee, Miri Moon, Taiwoo Park, Inseok Hwang,
Uichin Lee, and Junehwa Song. 2013. Dungeons &
swimmers: designing an interactive exergame for
swimming. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference
on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing adjunct
publication. ACM, 287–290.
4. Yu Ukai and Jun Rekimoto. 2013. Swimoid: a swim
support system using an underwater buddy robot. In
Proceedings of the 4th Augmented Human International
Conference. ACM, 170–177.

