2013 IEEE 10th International Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing and 2013 IEEE 10th International Conference
on Autonomic & Trusted Computing

Endless Flyer: A Continuous Flying Drone with
Automatic Battery Replacement
Katsuya Fujii

Keita Higuchi

Jun Rekimoto

Interdisciplinary Information Studies
The University of Tokyo, Japan
Email: katsuyaf@acm.org

Interdisciplinary Information Studies
The University of Tokyo, Japan
Email: khiguchi@acm.org

Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies
The University of Tokyo, Japan
rekimoto@acm.org

and sonar altitude sensors; thus, their ﬂight can be controlled
autonomously by computer. They can move freely through the
air and circumvent poor ground conditions such as uneven
roads and non-graded areas. When the Tohoku-Paciﬁc Ocean
Earthquake occurred, human-controlled UAVs were used to
survey the damage at the Fukushima Dai-1 nuclear plant. In
a recent study, UAVs were used to capture 3D reconstructed
images of indoor and outdoor environments using mounted
cameras.[1], [2]
UAVs have the potential to perform surveillance and monitoring missions autonomously without being constrained in
three dimensions or by ground obstacles. The trend toward
UAV technology use in aerial surveillance is rapidly increasing.
For example, aerial surveillance is used widely for the detection of oil spills and it is considered to be the most effective
method for this task. The presence of NASP surveillance
aircraft also acts as a deterrent to the illegal discharge of
pollutants into seas. [3]

Fig. 1. Endless Flyer : automatic battery replacement platform enables UAV
to ﬂy continuously without requiring manual battery replacement.

Abstract—Surveillance and monitoring are indispensable in
some large areas for purposes such as home security, road
patrols, livestock monitoring, wildﬁre mapping, and ubiquitous
sensing. Computer-controlled micro unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) have the potential to perform such missions because they
can move autonomously in a surveillance area without being
constrained by ground obstacles. However, the duration of ﬂights
is a serious problem with UAVs. A typical UAV can ﬂy only for
about 10 min using currently available Li-Po batteries, which
makes it difﬁcult to conduct tasks like aerial surveillance that
clearly require longer ﬂying periods. In this study, we developed
an automatic battery replacement mechanism that allows UAVs to
ﬂy continuously without manual battery replacement along with
the suggestion of the scalable and robust usage for the system. We
conducted an initial experiment using this system and successfully
assessed the possibility of continuous surveillance in both indoor
and outdoor environments.

I.

However, a serious problem with UAVs is their ﬂight time,
as they rely on Li-Po batteries for energy. Li-Po batteries
are used by many autonomous aerial vehicles because they
have a high energy density and they can sustain high current
loads. However, the heavy weight of the battery translates
directly into increased energy requirements of the UAV’s
motors, which limits the ﬂight time available for surveillance
and monitoring applications.
In this study, we developed an automatic battery replacement system called Endless Flyer that allows UAVs to ﬂy
continuously without being constrained by battery limitations.(Fig.1) Our contributions are as follows:
•

We described the design of the battery exchange
platform and suggested the scalable and robust usage
of the system.

•

We conducted initial experiments on this system in
both indoor and outdoor environments to examine
further challenges for transferring the system to realworld applications.

•

We used the experiment results to describe case scenarios for this system and proposed suitable applications, particularly for surveillance and monitoring.

•

Finally, we considered future work to take the best
advantage of this system.

I NTRODUCTION

Surveillance and monitoring are indispensable in some
large areas for purposes such as home security, road patrol,
pipeline security, livestock monitoring, wildﬁre mapping, and
ubiquitous sensing. The demands of these tasks may require
a system to work indoors, over large areas outdoors or under
poor ground conditions. Also, the system may be required to
operate continuously for long durations.
An unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is an aircraft without
a human pilot on board. UAVs are usually equipped with
embedded inertial sensors such as gyroscopes, accelerometers,
978-1-4799-2481-3/13 $31.00 © 2013 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/UIC-ATC.2013.103

216

Fig. 2. We can combine several position measurement methods to lead the UAV to the battery exchange platform. This way, the ﬂight area of the UAV is not
limited to within the range of the motion capture cameras.

II.

R ELATED W ORK

the UAV detects that its battery is running out, it returns to
the platform and recharges/exchanges its battery automatically.
Several institutions have already developed prototype battery
recharge platforms. [6], [7]

Although we adopted battery replacement for our system,
there are several approaches that overcome UAV ﬂight time
limitations. Here, we introduce other methods and discuss why
battery replacement is superior to other solutions.

2) Discussion: With a recharging system, waiting for a
battery to fully recharge is time-consuming compared to swapping the battery with a new battery. For aerial surveillance in
particular, real-time information may be the most important
factor. To meet this demand, a large number of platforms
may be required, which could be spatially inappropriate and
expensive.

A. Wired/Wireless Energy Supplies
1) Method: A UAV can be provided with a continuous
energy supply via a tether, containing a power cord and a wideband wire to transmit information back to the main station. [4]
Wireless systems include DARPAs Vulture program, which is
a giant solar plane that, theoretically, could ﬂy for ﬁve years.
Wireless power delivery systems based on laser beams have
also been developed by Laser Motive. UAVs carry photovoltaic
cells that are optimized to the laser wavelength, and they
convert about half of the laser power to generate a few watts of
electricity, which is sufﬁcient to power the motors of a small
helicopter. [5]

III.

E NDLESS F LYER

The Endless Flyer system comprises an automatic battery
exchange platform, a position measurement system, and a
UAV. When the UAV detects that its battery is running out,
it comes back to the platform and the battery is changed automatically. After the battery is exchanged, the UAV ﬂies away
to conduct tasks.(Fig.3) Several studies have worked on battery
exchange platforms.[8]Although we looked to some of them
for reference, we make the following unique contributions:

2) Discussion: In actual scenarios, however, a wired electricity supply might produce obstacles in the ﬂight path, and
a UAV may not be able to reach a wireless power source.
Although many studies have explored wireless supply
methods, such as electrodynamic induction, electrostatic induction, or electromagnetic radiation, none are efﬁcient enough,
a great amount of loss occurs, and a massive and expensive
device is often required
Although either system might allow a UAV to remain in
the air continuously, permanent ﬂying can also lead to heating
problems in the motor or other onboard circuits, so the UAV
may have to land on a platform to cool down.
B. Battery Recharge Platforms
1) Method: Using a ground platform to supply energy is
another solution that allows UAVs to ﬂy continuously. When

217

•

We described the design of the battery exchange
platform. This description allows us to share the
construction details in a way, that everybody with a
laser-printer could quickly rebuild the platform.

•

Initial experiments were performed for both indoor
and outdoor usage. Little research has been done on
outdoor experiments despite the fact that it is critical
to assess the feasibility of transferring the system to
real-world applications.

•

We also suggested the scalable and robust usage of the
system. The results of our study revealed that motion
capture is the most reliable position measurement

Fig. 3. Endless ﬂyer platform : 1) UAV ﬂies on platform. 2) UAV lands on
platform 3): UAV is pushed to correct position for battery swapping. and 4)
Battery exchange is conducted.

Fig. 5. Battery case and carriage: rectangular structure that secures battery.
The battery carriage is attached to the UAV by hooking to the UAV’s arms.

of the landing pad, we conducted an experiment to determine
the landing error of the UAV. In the experiment, the UAV
hovered at a speciﬁc point and tried to land directly under that
point. Because of the above factors, the UAV landed to the
side with errors. We performed this experiment 10 times, and
the maximum error was 10 cm. Thus, we designed a 20 cm2
landing pad, which we assumed to be sufﬁcient for landing.

Fig. 4. Landing platform: after landing, platform moves UAV to desired
position and orientation using arms.

While the landing pad can handle large errors, the battery swapping mechanism requires accurate UAV positioning.
Therefore, the system needs to be able to physically move the
UAV to the center of the landing pad and set it to the correct
orientation.(Fig.4) Repositioning was performed using arms
powered by servomotors. Each arm is L-shaped and forms
a coupler with a parallelogram four-bar linkage. Each arm is
powered by its own servomotor, so the arms can be actuated
one at a time to reliably rotate the UAV. These arms can be
also used to lock the UAV for the battery exchange. With the
large landing pad and arms, the UAV can be led to the desired
position for battery swapping.

method for the system. However, it might be inappropriate to limit the ﬂight area of the UAV in the motion
capture area. Our proposed solution is to keep the
motion capture system for accurate position measurement during battery exchange, but to use other position
measurement methods for other applications.(Fig.2)
Based on this, we addressed the application plan and
assessed the possibility of continuous surveillance for
both indoor and outdoor environments.
IV.

D ESIGN

1) Battery connector: For the battery connector, a solid
electrical connection is required. First, we developed a
cuboidal battery case with the positive terminal on the top
and the ground terminal on the bottom. We then developed a
battery carriage with an easy attachment and release mechanism so that the battery does not fall while ﬂying, but can still
be swapped readily.

A. Battery Exchange Mechanism
The battery exchange mechanism comprises a large landing
pad, a battery connector/carriage, and a battery swapping
mechanism.
The size of the landing platform needs to be large enough
for the UAV to land successfully on the landing pad. Even
with precise position measurement systems such as motion
capture that can provide position data with only slight errors,
a UAV may be unable to land at the correct position owing to
factors such as wind or loss of balance. To determine the size

The electrode of the battery carriage has a zigzag shape;
thus, it has several contact points with the battery case and
steadies the battery with its elasticity. The carriage is a
rectangular structure, and the battery is secured inside. This
battery carriage is attached to the UAV by the UAVs arms.
218

B. Aerial Platform
For an initial experiment, we used AR.Drone, which is
a small quadcopter with four blade propellers that can be
controlled by wireless communication. We placed trackable
motion capture markers on the AR.Drone to provide spatial
(x, y, and z) coordinates, and angle-of-rotation (pitch, roll,
and yaw) information. The battery was a three-cell, high-grade,
lithium-polymer battery, with a capacity of 1,000 mAh at 11.1
V, a discharge capacity of 10 C (10 A), and a weight of 105 g.
AR.Drone has a nominal ﬂight time capacity of approximately
10 min; however, as we attached the battery connector for
the system, the average ﬂight time was around 5 min. As a
single power supply requires 18.2 Wh to charge one battery,
to ﬂy AR Drone for 1hour, it requires 218.4Wh as the energy
requirement of the whole system.
C. Position Measurement
The system requires accurate point information so that the
UAV can land on the platform. We used OptiTrack as an optical
motion capture system to perform position measurements. We
selected the high-frame-rate OptiTrack S250e IR camera, with
120 fps capture speed, for the indoor experiment, and for the
outdoor experiment, we used Flex 13 cameras with 120 fps
capture speeds. Infrared (IR) pass ﬁlters placed over the camera
lens, which ﬁlter out all non-IR light sources above and below
850 nm, were also used. The system allows the calculation of
a markers position with an accuracy of 1 mm. We captured
the marker motions with eight cameras in a 4 m 4 m square
area.

Fig. 6. As motor rotates, arm moves linearly by lead screw mechanism used
in conjunction with nut.

With slight design modiﬁcations, it can also be attached to
other battery-powered UAVs.
Fig.5 shows two different types of UAVs with the battery
connector simply attached to the bottom of the body. The total
weight of the battery is 51 g.

All of these steps, including sending the parameters to the
AR.Drone, moving the arms, and swapping the battery, were
controlled by the computer without human intervention.

2) Battery Swapping Mechanism: The battery is pushed
and slides into the carriage in a linear motion from the recharge
bay.(Fig.6)The linear motion is produced by converting the
rotary motion of a stepper motor. The motor mechanically
rotates a lead screw that has a continuous helical thread
machined on its circumference. A lead nut with corresponding
helical threads is threaded onto the lead screw. The system
is designed such that the nut cannot rotate the lead screw.
Therefore, when the lead screw is rotated, the nut is driven
along the threads. The direction of motion of the nut depends
on the direction of rotation of the lead screw. By connecting
the battery push arm to the nut, the arm moves in linear motion
to position the battery. When a new battery slides in, another
battery is pushed and slides out.

V.

STUDY

We conducted several initial experiments using this system
to determine its feasibility. The UAV went through a process
with two phases: landing and battery exchange. We conducted
separate experiments for each phase to clearly identify points
that should be addressed. The following experiments were
conducted

Even though it is still in progress, we are currently developing a battery recharge station. The number of batteries used
by the system depends on how long the UAV can ﬂy with one
battery, as well as how long it takes to recharge the battery. If
a UAV ﬂies approximately 10 min with one battery, and the
average recharging time is 90 min, then the battery stations
need to have a total of 10 batteries to provide a continuous
cycle of recharged batteries. As the battery is swapped using
linear motion, we set two battery recharge stations on both
sides of the battery swapping area. Each station has 5 bays of
batteries that are connected to a rotating timing belt to switch
the batteries. The power supply provides 13,5 V/0.9 A output
which provides 12.1W Thus, the energy requirement of the
single charger to charge one battery is approximately 18.2 Wh.
219

•

First, we measured the UAV landing success rate
on the platform in an environment with no external
disturbances. The goal of this experiment was to
evaluate the platform design and identify the landing
error.

•

Second, we performed a battery exchange for a UAV
that was already on the platform. Our platform was
designed to allow the UAV to land anywhere on
the landing pad, as its arms move the UAV to the
center area after landing. The goal of this experiment
was to evaluate the design of the battery swapping
mechanism and identify any errors.

•

After evaluating the system design, we conducted the
same experiment outdoors. The goal of this experiment was to assess the feasibility of applying this
system in the real world.

•

Finally, we tested the entire process outdoors. Through
this experiment, we paved the way for a reliable
solution to the UAVs ﬂight time limitation.

A. Platform Landing Experiment
The landing pad was designed to be large enough to allow
the UAV to land on the platform. However, this needed to
be conﬁrmed, as the UAV may not always land successfully
owing to errors, such as an unbalanced landing or mistakes in
the control algorithm. To identify and deal with such errors,
we conducted a platform landing experiment. This experiment
was performed indoors with no external disturbances.

Fig. 8. Battery exchange experiment: after the UAV landed on the landing
pad, battery exchange was successfully performed for every case.

1) Environment: We controlled the UAV using the motion
capture system. The platform was set on the ground in the
center of the motion capture area. The UAV landed on the
platform after it ﬂew inside the 7.5 cm radius circle, above the
platform. The center of this circle corresponded to the center
of the platform. The velocity of the UAV was less than 0.3
m/s when landing. We performed 20 trials and measured the
success rate of the landing.

reveals that the battery exchange could be performed successfully once the UAV managed to land anywhere on the landing
pad.
C. Outdoor experiment

2) Result: Fig.7 shows an image of the experiment. The
UAV successfully landed on the platform 18 times out of
20 landing trials, for a 90% success rate. The UAV failed to
successfully land twice; it landed on the arms of the platform.
We address this error in the discussion section.

We then conducted the same experiments outdoors to
further examine how the results could be transferred to realworld applications. This experiment is a unique contribution
because little research has dealt with outdoor environments.
1) Environment: This experiment was performed under the
same conditions as the prior experiments, except that it was
outdoors, where external disturbances such as wind could
occur. We measured the UAV landing success rate on the
platform, followed by the battery exchange experiment.

B. Battery Exchange Experiment
We then performed the experiment on the battery exchange
mechanism. The UAV was set on the landing pad before the
experiment and was pushed to the center area by the battery
exchange arms. This experiment was performed indoors.

2) Result: The success rate of the battery exchange experiment was 100%.(Fig.9) Because the UAV was already set on
the landing pad, external disturbances did not greatly affect
the system. Therefore, once the UAV successfully landed on
the landing pad, the battery exchange could be done with no
errors. The success rate of the platform landing experiment
was 85%, which was slightly lower than that of the indoor
experiment. This was obviously due to external disturbances,
speciﬁcally wind. When the UAV tried to land on the platform,
it tended to swing because of the wind. However, as the motion

1) Environment: In this experiment, the UAV was set on
the platform at nine different positions and then moved to the
center point for battery swapping. We measured the success
rate of the battery exchange.
2) Result: Fig.8 shows an image of this experiment. The
success rate of the battery exchange was 100%. This result

Fig. 7.

UAV landed on platform with 90% success rate.

Fig. 9.

220

Landing and Battery exchange experiment outdoors.

Fig. 10.

Vertical trajectory in the experiment with wind velocity and 3D plotted graph for each of ﬁve trials.

capture camera continued monitoring the UAVs position and
kept it from landing when the conditions were not appropriate,
the landing success rate did not decrease considerably. The
landing error of the outdoor experiment was the same as that
of the indoor experiment, which we discuss later.

VI.

A PPLICATION P LAN

Though some modiﬁcations should be made, our system
can be considered a success and a step toward a reliable
solution to UAV ﬂight time limitations. We determined that
the UAV can be supplied with new energy as long as it
ﬂies in motion capture areas, both indoors and outdoors.
In other words, the UAV needs to ﬂy inside the motion
capture area, which may not be appropriate for real-world
applications. One solution could be to use different position
measurement methods to guide the UAVs. However, these do
not seem sufﬁciently accurate or scalable for battery exchange,
especially if the UAV suffers from external disturbances.

D. Continuous Flying Experiment
Finally, we conducted an experiment on the entire process
outdoors, to pave the way for ﬁnding a reliable solution to the
UAVs ﬂight time limitation.
1) Environment: The UAV ﬂew around the platform; when
the remaining battery charge dropped below 15%, the UAV
landed on the platform to exchange the battery and then ﬂew
away again. This process was repeated ﬁve times, and we
measured the trajectory of the UAV. As this experiment was
conducted outdoors, we also measured the wind velocity.

Our proposed solution is to keep the motion capture system
for accurate position measurement during battery exchange,
but to use other position measurement methods for other applications. For example, a UAV can conduct aerial surveillance
either by using a 2D matrix code with image processing or
through ﬁeld monitoring using a global positioning system
(GPS). Then it would come back to the motion capture area for
battery exchange. To determine the feasibility of the proposed
suggestion, we developed an indoor surveillance application.
We also introduced the proposed usage to an outdoor environment. This study was simply an exploration, so further research
is required to deploy this system in the real world.

2) Result: Fig.10 shows the trajectory of the UAV with
respect to the wind velocity. The UAV ﬂew continuously
with automatic battery exchange. The average ﬂight time and
battery exchange time were 3.58 min and 57.8 s, respectively.
During the ﬁrst and the fourth landing trial, the UAV ﬂew
unstably and took longer to land on the platform. This was
due to wind blowing at around 1.0 m/s. Although the UAV
successfully landed on the platform, we determined that the
UAV may be adversely affected by winds that are ¿0.8 m/s.
Solar radiation did not negatively affect the results in this
experiment.

A. Indoor Surveillance with Endless Flyer
In actual applications such as aerial surveillance, the UAV’s
ﬂying area should not be limited to motion capture areas.
221

2D markers and successfully led the UAV to the motion capture
area. However, if these other position measurement systems
are not sufﬁciently accurate, they can be combined to lead the
UAV to the battery exchange platform. Speciﬁcally, we can
roughly lead the UAV to the platform using GPS (10 m error)
and then use the 2D matrix code for position measurement
such that the UAV can ﬂy closer to the platform; however,
this method is not sufﬁciently accurate (1 m error). We can
then switch to the motion capture system to land the UAV on
the platform for battery exchange.
To set up our system more easily and quickly, we can also
attach the motion capture system to the platform to make the
system self-contained. Fig.12 shows an image of the motion
capture system with Endless Flyer.
B. Error Detection
Fig. 11. A: The UAV is conducting aerial surveillance in the corridor.
B: 2D matrix code was used for position mesurement in the corridor
C: The UAV is ﬂying to the platform to exchange the battery
D: The trajectory of this experiment in the motion capture area.

In our experiment, the errors were attributed to a missed
landing, which was often caused by external disturbances, such
as a blast of wind. These cases can be handled by checking
the values of inertial sensors embedded in the UAV, such as
gyros and accelerometers, as well as the position captured
by the motion capture system. When the system detects a
misalignment or landing failure, the system can resume UAV
ﬂight to try landing again. We need to develop an error
detection system to increase the robustness of the method.

Mr.Grzonka developed a fully autonomous indoor application
without a motion capture system.[9] We developed an application where the UAV conducts aerial surveillance outside the
motion capture area until it detects that the battery is running
out. It then ﬂies to the motion capture area to exchange the
battery.

C. Outside usages

In this application, the UAV ﬂew along a corridor and
used the motion capture camera area to land on the platform
when battery exchange was required. The UAV ﬂew along a
designated route using a 2D matrix code with image processing
that measured position.

Reﬂective optical motion capture systems use infrared
light-emitting diodes mounted around the camera lens. Therefore, their performance may decrease outdoors because sunlight can emit the same wavelength, which would affect
the correct detection of the motion capture. In the outdoor
experiments, we used Flex 13 cameras with a 120 fps capture
speed and IR pass ﬁlters placed over the camera lens to block
non-IR light sources with wavelengths above and below 850
nm. With these cameras, we can use the motion capture system
outdoors as long as the camera does not encounter obstacle that
diffuses reﬂections, such as a manhole.

Fig.11 shows the application scenario. The UAV successfully ﬂew along the corridor with the 2D matrix code and then
ﬂew into the motion capture area to exchange the battery.
B. Outdoor surveillance with Endless Flyer
There are many cases where UAVs cannot ﬂy in motion
capture areas outdoors. GPS is a common method for position
measurement outdoors, and many studies have been conducted
on using it to control UAVs. GPS is commonly combined
with inertial sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes
(INS). Many algorithms such as the Kalman ﬁlter have been
invented to combine measurements. [10], [11] In case of GPS
failure, some researchers have explored the possibility of using
a georeferenced satellite or aerial images to augment UAV
navigation. [12], [13] If we do not want to rely on a priori
infrastructure such as GPS, beacons, or a map, recent studies
have examined using Visual SLAM, which is based on image
sequences acquired by UAVs.[14] Combining this system with
Endless Flyer could allow us to develop continuous surveillance even for unknown areas without human intervention.
VII.

The study also revealed that external disturbances such as
wind may affect the system. We can artiﬁcially create a battery

D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE WORK

A. Usage Case Scenario
Here, we further discuss the case scenarios that we pointed
out in the section on application plans. As noted earlier, in
actual applications, the ﬂying area should not be limited to the
motion capture area. We were able to control the UAV using

Fig. 12. Motion capture system with Endless Flyer: position measurement
system can be implemented with Endless Flyer to produce self-contained
system.

222

[15] Endless Flyer can also allow UAVs to ﬂy over a speciﬁc
area and collect data continuously, thereby maximizing the
exploitation of its aerial mobility.
VIII.

C ONCLUSION

This goal of this study was to pave the way for solving
the limited ﬂight time of UAVs. We developed an autonomous
battery replacement platform and provided suggestions for the
scalable and robust usage of the system. We conducted initial
experiments on this system both indoors and outdoors because
little research has been conducted outdoors with this type of
system, where external disturbances may occur. In our system,
the UAV could land on the platform with a 90% success
rate, and once the UAV landed on the platform, the battery
exchange had a success rate of 100%. We then addressed some
modiﬁcations, including error detection that could increase the
robustness of our system. We also detailed suggestions for
using this system to perform aerial surveillance in real-world
applications. Our system is a successful step toward ﬁnding a
reliable solution to the UAV ﬂight time limitations.

Fig. 13.
When UAV misses landing on platform, inertial sensor data or
motion capture data can be used to detect errors. The UAV can ﬂy again and
try to land successfully.

R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
Fig. 14. Motion capture for outside usage:
A. when system faces something that diffuses reﬂections, it cannot detect
marker correctly.
B. when it faces a surface that does not diffuse like asphalt, it can detect
markers. The green square indicates detection points.

[4]

[5]
[6]

exchange area surrounded by the motion capture cameras,
along with protection walls that keep wind, rain, and sunlight
from affecting the UAV. Based on the suggestion we made in
the section regarding the case scenario, the UAV ﬂight area is
not limited in such applications.

[7]

[8]

D. Multiple UAVs with Endless Flyer
We used a single UAV to assess the feasibility of Endless
Flyer. It was possible for the UAV to ﬂy continuously, but it
still required a speciﬁc period of time to exchange the battery,
which prevented it from ﬂying continuously. However, applications such as aerial surveillance demand real-time information.
Therefore, we propose the use of multiple UAVs based on the
Endless Flyer system for such applications. The use of two
UAVs would mean that one could change its battery while the
other is ﬂying. Thus, there is always one UAV ﬂying in the
air, which facilitates continuous aerial surveillance.

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

E. Other Tasks

[14]

Endless Flyer can also extend the potential applications of
UAVs in sensor networking. Traditional sensor nodes generally
sense their environment passively, so they are either deployed
statically or attached to mobile objects. UAVs can serve as
active sensor nodes to provide an aerial view of large areas.

[15]

223

A. Huang, A. Bachrach, P. Henry, M. Krainin, D. Maturana, D. Fox, and
N. Roy. Visual odometry and mapping for autonomous ﬂight using an
rgb-d camera. Int. Symposium on Robotics Research ISRR,Flagstaff,
Arizona, USA, 2011.
A. Wendel, M. Maurer, G. Graber, T. Pock, and H. Bischof.Dense
reconstruction on-the-ﬂy. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
CVPR, 2012 IEEE Conference on, pages 1450 ?1457, june 2012.
Tans Port Canada,Spill Prevention: National Aerial Surveillance Program 2013-01-09
Muttin, F., Umbilical deployment modelling for tethered UAV detecting
oil pollution from ship. Applied Ocean Research, 33(4),pp. 332-343,
2011.
Homeland Security News Wire,Laser-powered, ground-charged UAV
stays aloft for hours 2010-03-09
D Dale and J P How (2007) Automated ground maintenance and health
management for autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles. Thesis (M.
Eng.), Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technolog (MIT)
P Kemper F, K A O Suzuki, J R Morrison (2011) UAV consumable
replenishment:Design concepts for automated service stations. Journal
of Intelligent Robotic Systems 61:369-397
K A Swieringa et al. (2010) Autonomous battery swapping system
for smallscale helicopters. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp 3335-3340
Grzonka, S. ; Grisetti, G. ; Burgard, W. A Fully Autonomous Indoor
Quadrotor Robotics, IEEE Transactions on Volume: 28 , Issue: 1
Sasiadek, J.Z. ; Hartana, P. Robust INS/GPS Sensor Fusion for UAV Localization Using SDRE Nonlinear Filtering Robotics and Automation,
2004. Proceedings. ICRA ’04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on
Nemra, A. ; Aouf, N. Sensor fusion for navigation of an autonomous
unmanned aerial vehicle Sensors Journal, IEEE Volume: 10 , Issue: 4
Conte, G. ; Doherty, P. An Integrated UAV Navigation System Based on
Aerial Image Matching Aerospace Conference, 2008 IEEE
Lindsten, F. ; Callmer, J. ; Ohlsson, H. ; Tornqvist, D. ; Schon, T.B. ;
Gustafsson, F. Geo-referencing for UAV navigation using environmental
classiﬁcation Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference
Richard SteffenVisual SLAM from image sequences acquired by unmanned aerial vehicles vorgelegt am 27. Juli 2009 von
M. Quaritsch, K. Kruggl, D. Wischounig-Strucl, S. Bhattacharya, M.
Shah, B. RinnerNetworked UAVs as aerial sensor network for disaster
management applications Elektrotechnik & Informationstechnik (2010)
127/3: 56?63. DOI 10.1007/s00502-010-0717-2

