Fairy Lights in Femtoseconds: Aerial and Volumetric Graphics Rendered by
Focused Femtosecond Laser Combined with Computational Holographic Fields
Yoichi Ochiai1*
1University

Kota Kumagai2*

of Tsukuba

Takayuki Hoshi3

2Utsunomiya

University

Jun Rekimoto4

3Nagoya

Satoshi Hasegawa2

Institute of Technology

4The

Yoshio Hayasaki2
University of Tokyo

Figure 1. Application images of Fairy Lights in Femtoseconds, aerial and volumetric graphics in air rendered by femtosecond

lasers. (a) A “fairy” flying in front of a finger. (b) A “sprout” coming out from a seed. (c) Interference between a point cloud and a
finger. (d) The SIGGRAPH logo.

Abstract
We present a method of rendering aerial and volumetric
graphics using femtosecond lasers. A high-intensity laser
excites a physical matter to emit light at an arbitrary 3D
position. Popular applications can then be explored especially
since plasma induced by a femtosecond laser is safer than that
generated by a nanosecond laser. There are two methods of
rendering graphics with a femtosecond laser in air: Producing
holograms using spatial light modulation technology, and
scanning of a laser beam by a galvano mirror. The holograms
and workspace of the system proposed here occupy a volume of
up to 1 cm3; however, this size is scalable depending on the
optical devices and their setup. This paper provides details of
the principles, system setup, and experimental evaluation, and
discussions on scalability, design space, and applications of this
system. We tested two laser sources: an adjustable (30-100 fs)
laser which projects up to 1,000 pulses per second at energy up
to 7 mJ per pulse, and a 269-fs laser which projects up to
200,000 pulses per second at an energy up to 50 μJ per pulse.
We confirmed that the spatiotemporal resolution of volumetric
displays, implemented with these laser sources, is 4,000 and
200,000 dots per second. Although we focus on laser-induced
plasma in air, the discussion presented here is also applicable to
other rendering principles such as fluorescence and
microbubble in solid/liquid materials.

1

Introduction

Three-dimensional (3D) displays have attracted great attention
over the past five decades. 3D virtual objects were originally
displayed with a head-mounted display in [Sutherland 1968].
Since then, continuous efforts have been made to explore 3D
displays that have planar surfaces, and several methods have
been developed to provide stereopsis for binocular vision
[Benzie et al. 2007]. The technologies that employ glasses to
achieve this are based on such as anaglyphs, time-division, and
polarization. On the other hand, those technologies that do not
rely on glasses are based on such as parallax barrier and
lenticular lens array [Masia et al. 2013]. Although these
methods can offer effective 3D images, they require calculation
and generation of precise images for multiple viewpoints, and
users have to stay within a limited view angle.

A different approach to realize advanced 3D displays is using a
physical 3D space to render graphics instead of a planar surface
and forming a visual representation of an object in three
physical dimensions, as opposed to the planar image of
traditional screens that simulate depth through various visual
effects [Masia et al. 2013]. These 3D displays, which are called
volumetric displays, allow users to view the displayed images
from any angle. Volumetric displays arrange “voxels” in a 3D
space. They are divided into two categories by the
CR Categories: H.5 [Information interfaces and presentation];
characteristics of the voxels: emitting or reflecting light. The
voxels emitting light may be LEDs [Clar 2008], end points of
Keywords: Volumetric display, Laser plasma, Femtosecond laser, optical fibers [Willis et al. 2012], or laser-induced plasma
Aerial interaction, Touchable aerial images
[Kimura et al. 2006]. Those reflecting projected light may take
the form of fog [Rakkolainen et al. 2005a], water drops [Barnum
et al. 2010], or floating small particles [Ochiai et al. 2014]. In
* Joint first authors
this study, we focus on laser-induced plasma.
Laser-induced plasma has the following advantages. First, it
does not require physical matter arranged and suspended in air
to emit light. Second, it does not require wires and structures
that possibly obstruct the line-of-sight because power is
transmitted wirelessly. Third, the laser can be precisely
controlled owing to the progress in optical technologies.
We envision a laser-induced plasma technology in general

Figure 2: These figures show the example applications of proposed laser-based graphics technology. (a) Images superposed on a

hand and a box. (b) Floating button with haptic feedback. (c-d) Volumetric images rendered in open and closed areas.
applications for public use. If laser-induced plasma aerial
images were made available, many useful applications such as
augmented reality (AR), aerial user interfaces, volumetric
images could be produced (Figure 2). This would be a highly
effective display for the expression of three-dimensional
information. Volumetric expression has considerable merit
because the content scale corresponds to the human body;
therefore, this technology could be usefully applied to wearable
materials and spatial user interactions. Further, laser focusing
technology adds an additional dimension to conventional
projection technologies, which offer surface mapping while laser
focusing technology is capable of volumetric mapping. Thus,
this technology can be effectively used in real-world-oriented
user interfaces.
Plasma-based 3D displays were previously developed using a
nanosecond laser [Kimura et al. 2006] and femtosecond (100fs)
laser [Saito et al. 2008]. These studies on laser-plasma graphics
were pioneering but still uncompleted. Our motivation is to
expand their achievements and provide complete discussion on
this laser-plasma graphics technology.

In this study, we use femtosecond lasers with pulse durations of
30-100 fs, and 269 fs. This leads to safer plasma generation
than nanosecond lasers, which can be incorporated into our
daily lives. The design space and possible scenarios of the
plasma-based 3D display are discussed. In addition, we use an
optical device, called the spatial light modulator (SLM), to
modify the phase of light rays and produce various spatial
distributions of light based on interference.

Figure 3: A map of related work divided into four categories

regarding to non-position-control/position control and
reflection/emission. This study falls into the position-control
and emission category.

In this section, first, we survey conventional studies on
volumetric displays and divide them into four categories:
Non-position-control/position-control and reflection/emission.
Note that some of them are not 3D but 2.5D, and
position-control in 2.5D means surface deformation. Our study
is associated with the position-control and emission category
(Figure 3). Next, previous studies on plasma-based 3D display
are described, and the issues that have not been discussed are
pointed out. Last, studies on aerial interaction are cited, and an
additional property of our study is clarified.

The primary contribution of this paper is the production of an
in-air SLM-based laser-plasma graphics that enables physical 2.1 Volumetric displays
contact and interaction by ultra-short pulse duration laser. Also,
the principles are theoretically described, the characteristics of 2.2.1 Non-position-control types
this technology are experimentally examined, and the
applications and scalability are discussed.
Reflection: In this category, the work space is filled with small
objects of a material that can passively reflect projected or
The remaining sections of this paper discuss the following: First, environmental light. 3D displays based on mechanical motion of
we describe the principles and design parameters of mirror or screen are discussed in [Parker 1948]. A spinning
femtosecond-laser-based volumetric displays. We explore a safe, mirror is used with a high-speed projector in [Jones et al. 2007],
high-resolution, wide-variety laser-based volumetric display where different images are projected onto the mirror according
using a femtosecond laser and an SLM. Second, we introduce to its azimuthal angle to express a 360± light field of an object.
the setup we designed. Third, we give examples of applications. Similarly, images are projected onto a rotating screen [Favalora
Finally, we conduct experiments on generation, safety, and et al. 2002] and a rotating diffuser plate [Karnik et al. 2011].
control of lasers. We also discuss the limitations and estimate The systems proposed in [Rakkolainen et al. 2005a; Lee et al.
scalability. We believe that this study fills the gaps in design 2009] use fog as reflecting material. A thin layer of fog is
space of plasma-based 3D displays that were left unresolved by generated and images are projected onto it. In [Eitoku et al.
previous studies.
2006], falling water drops are utilized as a screen. The lens-like
property of water drops delivers projected images to users’ eyes.
2 Related work
Subsequently, multilayer water drops screens were

implemented [Barnum et al. 2010] and different images were
projected onto different layers by synchronizing the projector
with the water valves. In DepthCube [Sullivan 2004], a
multi-layered liquid crystal shutters is illuminated by a
high-speed projector. Photochromic materials are used in
[Hashida et al. 2011] to form a volumetric and multi-color
display controlled by an ultraviolet projector. Holodust [Perlin
and HAN 2006] illuminates floating small particles by lasers.
Small particles are launched into air and illuminated by a
projector in [Matoba et al. 2012].
Emission: In this category, objects occupying the work space
actively emit light to show images. Clar [Clar 2008] created a
3D cubic array of LEDs. In this setup, the LEDs are supported
by a framework and the relative positions of them (i.e., voxels)
are fixed. Currently fabrication type 3D volume displays are
explored [Willis et al. 2012]. 3D print objects with embedded
light paths can display information when the objects are placed
on a flat display. As the objects get more complex, the light
paths also get complex and make it difficult to design the object
to be printed. Pereira et al. [Pereira et al. 2014] solve the issue
by algorithmically computing the arrangement of the light
paths so that their endings form a desired surface shape, such
as that of a face.
2.1.2

Position-control types

Reflection: In this category, the positions of reflection objects
are controlled to render graphics. Studies focusing on
controlling the surface shape of a screen or display have also
been pursued. For example, the deformable screen Project
FEELEX [Iwata et al. 2001] changes its surface shape by linear
actuators. A deformable screen inForm [Follmer et al. 2013] not
only displays images on it but also interacts with objects.
[Ochiai et al. 2013] used focused ultrasound to deform a soap
film, without making contact, to show a bump on it. Pixie Dust
[Ochiai et al. 2014] is a floating display consisting of small
particles that are suspended and moved by means of acoustic
levitation.
Emission: Light sources are moved to realize 3D displays in this
category. This type of volumetric displays was originally
reported in [Jansson and Berlin 1979]. Many types of
volumetric displays are explored for 35 years. [Grossman and
Balakrishnan 2006] did great survey on this volumetric area.
[Macfarlane 1994] proposed a voxel-based spatial display.
LUMEN [Poupyrev et al. 2004] comprises of LEDs attached to
linear actuators and shows information in the form of RGB
(red-green-blue) and H (height). Laser plasma, which is free
from physical support and connection, is used as a light source
in [Kimura et al. 2006]. We also work in this technology to use
this advantage.

2.2

one, rendering algorithms of point cloud were discussed in
[Ishikawa and Saito 2008a; Ishikawa and Saito 2008b].
Although these studies on laser-plasma graphics were
pioneering, the detailed discussion on the light emission, design
space, scalability, and so on was not provided in the published
papers. We provide the discussion on these issues in this paper,
and complete laser-based graphics in air from principles to
applications.
Laser-based 3D displays in materials other than air were also
demonstrated. An in-water type2 of laser-based volumetric
display was developed in [Kimura et al. 2011] where 50,000
dot/sec was achieved. While no detailed principle was provided,
we infer that this in-water type is not based on laser plasma but
laser-induced microbubbles. The green light dots generated by a
green laser can be explained as diffusion of the incident laser by
the microbubbles. Fluorescent materials were used in [Soltan et
al. 1992; Downing et al. 1996; Hasegawa and Hayasaki 2013].
Pulse peak intensity required for the microbubble- and
fluorescence-based rendering, as experimentally confirmed in
Section 5.3. This offers higher rendering speed than the
plasma-based rendering so that not a set of lines but a surface
can be represented [Ishikawa et al. 2011].

2.3

Aerial interaction

Volumetric, aerial, and/or 3D displays are usually accompanied
by interaction with users’ hand. For example, users can directly
interact with graphics rendered on a thin layer of fog
[Rakkolainen et al. 2005b]. Touchable Holography [Hoshi et al.
2009] and RePro3D [Yoshida et al. 2010] show 2D and 3D
images in air, respectively, and also provide haptic feedback.
Small particles are acoustically levitated in [Ochiai et al. 2014]
and users can touch them. ZeroN [Lee et al. 2011], although it is
a tangible system rather than a graphic system, magnetically
levitates a sphere and users can touch and also handle it. For
aerial interaction, there are two necessary conditions on
volumetric displays. They should be safe and accessible. The
previous works based on lasers do not satisfy these conditions.
The in-air type [Kimura et al. 2006] is harmful to users’ hand
because of plenty of energy and the in-water type [Kimura et al.
2011] renders images in a transparent container filled with
water. In this paper, we attempt to demonstrate safe and
accessible laser-based volumetric display.
Table 1: Comparison between the previous and this study.

Laser-based volumetric displays

As mentioned before, laser-plasma 3D displays are categorized
as the position-control and emission type 3D display. Voxels in
air are generated by high-intensity lasers which are achieved
by shortening pulse duration (e.g. nanoseconds or shorter)
under a limited total power.
The basic concept was demonstrated using a nanosecond laser
in [Kimura et al. 2006] where a rendering speed was 100
dot/sec. Later, 1,000 dot/sec was achieved [Saito et al. 2008] by
adoption of a femtosecond (100 fs) laser1. The color of voxels
was bluish white because of plasma emission. With the latter

1http://www.aist.go.jp/aist_j/press_release/pr2007/pr20070710

/pr20070710.html (in Japanese)

2http://www.diginfo.tv/v/11-0231-r-en.php

(last accessed 17 June 2015)

Figure 5: Image examples rendered with a 269-fs infrared laser.

(Left) Laser plasma in air by Galvano scanning. (Center)
Fluorescent emission in fluorescent solid material by CGH.
(Right) Microbubbles in water by Calvano scanning.

Figure 4: Laser plasma induced by focused femtosecond laser.

2.4

Position of this study

The development of a volumetric display has two problems
which have been encountered in conventional studies: how to
suspend and emit voxels. The application of laser plasma
technology to a volumetric display overcomes these two issues,
because laser plasma generates an emission point at an
arbitrary position in a 3D space. In addition, studies on
conventional laser volumetric displays have not sufficiently
discussed theoretical principles and scalability. This study
focuses on a system for rendering volumetric graphics in air
using a femtosecond laser. An ultrashort-pulse laser and SLM
are used in our system, which allows us to explore touch
interaction and computer-generated holograms. These
explorations and evaluations are useful as regards discussion of
the scalability and application space of a plasma-based
volumetric display using a high-intensity laser for general,
wide-spread application.

The last effect is plasma, or ionization. In particular, tunnel
ionization can produce sufficiently visible light, which
dominantly occurs when the laser intensity is greater than 1014
W/cm2 [Keldysh 1965]. The potential well of a molecule or atom
is deformed by the electric field of the high-intensity laser to
have a potential barrier, and then, an electron has the
opportunity to leave the atom (i.e., ionization) based on the
tunnel effect. It is known that higher laser intensity leads to
higher tunnel-ionization probability; that is, more electrons are
ionized [Ammosov et al. 1986]. The ionized electron is
recombined with the atom after a half cycle and a photon is
emitted. This effect is called laser breakdown. The emitted light
looks bluish white.
In this study, we focus on the third effect, i.e. ionization,
because it can be achieved in air (Figure 4).

3.2

Laser filamentation

In this section, we show how to generate light spots by lasers.

An emission dot generated by a high-intensity laser has a tail
along the propagation direction. This tail is generated as the
self-focusing behavior, due to the optical Kerr effect, competes
with the natural diffraction of the laser beam; however, this
effect is undesirable when rendering 3D graphics in air.
Practically, this effect is invisible to the human eye because the
light from the focal point is relatively much brighter, but might
be taken into consideration in some special cases.

3.1

3.3

3

Principles

Laser-induced light spot

There are three types of laser-induced effects (Figure 5) that
produce light spots, and fluorescence is one among them. First,
an orbital electron in a molecule or atom is excited when the
atom absorbs one or more photons. Next, a new photon is
emitted when the electron relaxes. If two photons are absorbed
at the same time, the wavelength of the emitted photon is half
of that of the original photons. The wavelength required to
excite an electron is dependent upon the type of fluorescent
material. The emitted light has N times shorter wavelength
when N photons are absorbed simultaneously. This effect occurs
with a relatively low-intensity laser (an energy of nJ to mJ is
sufficient). Confocal laser microscopy is based on this effect
[Denk et al. 1990; Paddock 1999].
Cavitation is another effect that plays a key role. Microbubbles
are generated at the focal point of a laser in a liquid medium.
This localized cluster of microbubbles diffuses the incident laser
such that the laser is seen as a point light. The color of this
point light depends directly on the wavelength of the incident
laser. This fact indicates that RGB images can be expressed by
using multiple lasers of different wavelengths. The
microbubbles show just environment light if the laser is
invisible (infrared and ultraviolet). This effect requires an
intense laser to generate microbubbles.

Voxel sizes

We assume that the size of an emission dot (i.e., a voxel) is
equal to the size of the focal point of the laser. The focal point is
usually an oval that has two diameters. One is the diameter
perpendicular to the laser beam, wf , which is the diffraction
limit and determined by the original beam width, a, the focal
length, r, and the wavelength, λ, such that

w f = 2λ

r,
a

(1)

The other is the diameter along the laser beam, wd, which is
geometrically obtained from the relationship a : wf = r : wd/2,
such that
2

r
wd = 4λ   .
a

3.4

(2)

Computational phase modulation

The use of SLMs is one method to render holograms. In general,
an SLM has an array of computer-controlled pixels that
modulate a laser beam’s intensities, phases, or both. This
optical device is used in, for example, laser processing to
generate an arbitrary pattern of laser [Hayasaki et al. 2005].
A liquid crystal SLM (LCSLM) is used in this study, which

contains a nematic liquid crystal layer. The molecule directions
within this layer are controlled by electrodes, i.e., pixels, and
the phase of light ray reflected by each pixel is modulated
according to the direction of the liquid crystal molecule. In other
words, this device acts as an optical phased array.
The spatial phase control of light enables the control of focusing
position along both the lateral (XY) and axial (Z) directions. A
complex amplitude (CA) of the reconstruction from the
computer-generated hologram (CGH) Ur is given by the Fourier
transform of that of a designed CGH pattern Uh:

[

]

U r (ν x ,ν y ) = ∫∫ U h ( x, y ) exπ − i 2π (xν x + yν y ) dxdy

[

]

= ar (ν x ,ν y ) exπ iϕ r (ν x ,ν y )

U h ( x, y ) = ah ( x, y )exp[iϕ h (x, y )]

where ah and φh are the amplitude and phase of the hologram
plane displayed on the SLM, respectively. In the experiment, ah
is constant because an irradiation light to the CGH is
considered as the plane wave with a uniform intensity
distribution. φh is designed by ORA algorithm. On the other
hand, ar and φr are the amplitude and phase of the
reconstruction plane, respectively. The spatial intensity
distribution of reconstruction is actually observed as |Ur|2 = ar2.
In the control of focusing position along the lateral (XY)
direction, the CGH is designed based on a superposition of CAs
of blazed gratings with variety of azimuth angles. If the
reconstruction has N-multiple focusing spots, CGH includes
N-blazed gratings. In the control of focusing position along the
axial (Z) direction, a phase Fresnel lens pattern

x2 + y2
ϕ p ( x, y ) = k
2f

with a focal length f is simply added to φh, where k = 2π/λ is a
wave number. In this case, the spatial resolution of the SLM
determines the minimum focal length, following the theory
discussed in Section 3.3.
ORA method is an optimization algorithm to obtain the
reconstruction of CGH composed of spot array with a uniform
intensity (Figure 6). It is based on adding an adequate phase
variation calculated by an iterative optimization process into
the CGH. In the i-th iterative process, amplitude ah and phase
φh(i) at a pixel h on the CGH plane, and a complex amplitude
(CA) Ur(i) at a pixel r corresponding to focusing position on the
reconstruction plane are described in the computer as follows,
h

=ω

(i )
r

∑a
h

h

[(

exp i ϕ hr + ϕ

(i )
h

(5)

)]

where uhr is CA contributed from a pixel h on the CGH plane to a
pixel r on the reconstruction plane, φhr is a phase contributed by
the light propagation from a pixel h to a pixel r, ωr(i) is a weight
coefficient to control the light intensity at pixel r. In order to
maximize a sum of the light intensity Σr |Ur(i)|2 at each pixel r,
the phase variation Δφh(i) added to φh(i) at pixel h is calculated
using flowing equations.

∆ϕ h(i )

S 
= tan −1  2  ,
 S1 

(
sin (ϕ

(6)

)
),

S1 = ∑ ω r(i ) a h cos ϕ r − ϕ hr − ϕ h(i ) ,

(7)

S 2 = ∑ ω r(i ) a h

(8)

r

r

r

− ϕ hr − ϕ h(i )

(a) An original image, (b) a converted spot-array image of the
original image, and (c) a CGH to be displayed on the SLM.

(3)
(4)

U r(i ) = ω r(i ) ∑ u hr(i )

Figure 6: Example of a computer-generated hologram (CGH).

where ωr is the phase at pixel r on the reconstruction plane. The
phase of CGH φh(i) is updated by calculated Δφh(i) as follows.

ϕ h(i ) = ϕ h(i −1) + ∆ϕ h(i ) ,

(9)

is also updated according to the light
Furthermore,
intensity of the reconstruction obtained by the Fourier
transform of Eq. (9) in order to control the light intensity at
pixel r on the reconstruction plane.
ωr(i)

 I r( d )
(i )
 Ir

ω r(i ) = ω r(i −1) 





α

(10)

where Ir(i) = |Ur(i)|2 is the light intensity at pixel r on the
reconstruction plane in the i-th iterative process, Ir(d) is an
desired light intensity, and α is constant. The phase variation
Δφh(i) is optimized by the above iterative process (Eqs. (6)-(10))
until Ir(i) is nearly equal to Ir(d). Consequently, ORA method
allows us to design the CGH with the high quality.

3.5

Graphics positioning

The galvano mirror used in this study covers an area of 10 × 10
mm2. Besides, the SLM also renders graphics within the
approximately same area. This means that we have two options
to place a point at an intended position: One is leading a laser
there by the galvano mirrors and the other is modifying the
spatial distribution of the laser by the SLM. The conditions
and/or response times of these devices determine which is
suitable.
The theoretical rendering limit is 33 dots/s for 30 frame/s,
because the femtosecond laser is pulsed at a frequency of 1 kHz.
The SLM is used to render additional dots in a single frame,
while the galvano mirror is used primarily for positioning the
rendered holograms.

3.6

Spatiotemporal resolution

The number of dots per frame (dpf) is a parameter that must be
evaluated for laser-based volumetric displays. We now assume
the dots are displayed in darkness; therefore, the minimum
required energy for each dot is equal to the laser breakdown
threshold, Elbd. The total output energy, Etot, is divided among
the dots by the SLM. The number of dots per laser pulse, Ndot, is
expressed as

N dot =

Etot .
Elbd

(11)

The number of dots per frame is determined by Ndot, the repeat
frequency, Frep, of the laser pulses, and the frame time, Tf, which
is determined based on the persistence of human vision. Hence,
(12)
dpf = N dat × Frep × T f .

For example, if Ndot = 100, Frep = 1 kHz, and Tf = 100 ms, an
animation of 10,000 dpf is played in 10 fps. Note that, in
practice, the number of dots per frame is determined by the
bottleneck of the time response of the galvano mirrors and/or
the SLM, instead of by Frep.

Figure 7: Setup of our light circuit. The host computer controls (2) the SLM for hologram generation, (5) the galvano scanner for

XY control, and (9) the varifocal lens for Z control.

frequency of 1 kHz, and pulse energy in the 1 to 2-mJ range.
The specifications of the laser sources are shown in Table 2.
Figure 8 shows example results for our system in the air.

Figure 8: Relationship between the XYZ-coordinate and the
focused laser beam. Voxels are rendered above the objective
lens.

4 Implementation
In this section, we show our system implementation. First, we
introduce an overview of our system. Next, we describe our light
source, optical circuit (i.e., arrangement of optical devices), 3D
scanning system, SLM, and the control system.

4.1

Overview

Figure 7 shows the system configuration of our basic setup.
This system aims to produce a simultaneous-multi-point
volumetric display. It consists of a femtosecond laser source, an
XYZ scanner (galvano scanner + varifocal lens), and a liquid
crystal on silicon SLM (LCOS-SLM) displaying a CGH for
simultaneously addressed voxels. Our system was tested and
investigated at 20.5 deg C. The atmosphere was ordinary air
(80% N2 and 20% 02).
The setup was tested using three light sources (A and B), the
specifications of which are given below. We primarily used a
femtosecond laser source developed by Coherent Co., Ltd.,
which has a center wavelength of 800 nm, a repetition

The galvano mirror scans the emission dot along the lateral
directions (X- and Y-scanning), while the varifocal lens can vary
its focal point in the axial direction (Z-scanning). The Fourier
CGH is used for simultaneously addressed voxels [Hayasaki et
al. 2005]. The CGH, designed with an optimal-rotation-angle
(ORA) method [Bengtsson 1994], is displayed on the
LCOS-SLM, which has 768 × 768 pixels, a pixel size of 20 × 20
μm2, and a response time of 100 ms. The specifications of each
component are shown in Tables 3 and 4. In addition to these
components, we use a microscope for monitoring and recording
which is connected to the computer via USB.

4.2

Light source

We use two light sources. The light source that is primarily
used for evaluation and application was developed by Coherent
Co., Ltd and has a center wavelength of 800 nm, repetition
frequency of 1 kHz, pulse energy of up to 2 mJ, and the pulse
width is adjustable from 30 to 100 fs. Figure 9 shows the
spectra and pulse intensities of the 30- and 100-fs settings with
this light source. Ultra-short pulses are generated by
converting low-intensity and long-duration pulses to
high-intensity and short-duration ones. If the average laser
Table 2: Specifications of laser sources.

pulse energy is unchanged, the peak intensity differs according
to pulse width. In fact, the 30-fs pulse width has a three-fold
greater peak intensity than the 100-fs pulse width at the same
average energy. We refer to the system using this light source as
System A.
The other light source we used is the FCPA μJewel DE1050
from IMRA America, Inc. The laser has a center wavelength of
1045 nm, repetition frequency of 200 kHz, pulse energy of up to
50 μJ and pulse width of 269 fs. We refer to the system with this
light source as System B. Note that the peak intensity of laser
is important to produce the aerial plasma, rather than the pulse
width. Both of Systems A and B have sufficient peak intensity
to excite the air and generate emission dot.

4.3

Optical circuit

Here, we describe our optical circuit following the path of the
laser. Figure 7 shows the optical setup of System A. The laser is
generated by the femtosecond light source and then
phase-modulated by the SLM. The SLM energy conversion rate
is 65 to 95%. Then, the beam spot is varied by two lenses (F =
450 and 150 mm). Through this two-lens unit, the beam spot is
reduced by a factor of 1/3. It is then reflected by the galvano
mirror, which determines the XY-position of the light. The
galvano and SLM are connected in an object-image
correspondence. Subsequently, the beam spot is adjusted by two
lenses (F = 100, 150 mm); this two-lens unit magnifies the beam
spot 1.5-fold. Then, the light enters the varifocal lens. The
varifocal lens and galvano mirror are connected in an
object-image correspondence and the former adjusts the z-axis
focal points. The light enters the objective lens (F = 40 mm).
Once it exits this lens, it excites the display medium (air). The
energy conversion rate of System A is 53%.
System B has the same structure but lacks a SLM. Also, the
lens sets are slightly different from those of System A.
Specifically, System B has no lens before the galvano mirror, as
the varifocal lens is positioned after the galvano mirror. Then,
the beam spot is adjusted by the two-lens unit (F = 50, 80 mm).
An F20 objective lens is employed and System B’s total energy
conversion rate is 80%.

4.4

3D scanning system

In this subsection, we describe our scanning system in detail.
Figure 7 shows the galvano and varifocal lenses. We employ
galvano mirrors to scan the lateral directions (X- and
Y-scanning), while a varifocal lens can change its focal point in
the beam axial direction (Z-scanning). For system A, we utilize
a Canon GH-315 driven by GB-501 as the galvano mirror and
for System B we employ an Intelliscan 20i to scan the beams.
Both are connected by PCI boards. Table 3 shows the
specifications of each of the galvano mirrors. We employ an
Optotune EL-10-30 for both Systems A and B as the varifocal
lens, which is connected via USB serial to a PC. The
Table 3: Specifications of galvano mirrors.

specifications of the varifocal lens are shown in Table 4. These
devices are operated by original applications coded in C++.

4.5

LCSLM

The LCSLM (Hamamatsu, PPM) is a parallel-aligned nematic
liquid crystal spatial light modulator (PAL-SLM) coupled with a
liquid crystal display (LCD) and a 680-nm laser diode (LD).
This device, which can perform phase-only modulation of more
than 2 radian, is frequently used to display real-time CGHs.
The PALSLM is composed of a liquid crystal (LC) layer, a
dielectric mirror, and an optically addressed photoconductive
(PC) layer containing amorphous silicon, which are sandwiched
between two transparent indium tin oxide electrodes. The LC
molecules are aligned in parallel. When incident light
illuminates the PC layer, the impedance of this layer decreases
and the electric field across the LC layer increases accordingly.
With this increased field, the LC molecules become tilted in the
propagation direction of the readout light and the effective
refractive index of the LC layer decreases. Pure phase
modulation occurs only when the polarization direction of the
femtosecond laser is parallel to the aligned direction of the LC
molecules. The CGH pattern on the LCD illuminated by the LD
is applied to the PC layer through an imaging optics.

4.6

Control system

Figure 7 shows our system diagram. The system is controlled
using a Windows PC operating system, with all programs coded
in C++. The control system operates the SLM, galvano mirror,
and varifocal lenses. To monitor the interaction, a USB
microscope is connected to the system. The galvano and
varifocal lenses run along different threads and are
synchronized when new draw patterns are input. The user
input is captured at 20 Hz and the SLM is connected to the
computer as an external display.

5

Experiments and Evaluations

In this section, we describe our experiments and system
evaluation procedures. Firstly, we introduce an overview of our
experimental plan and results. Then, we report the results of
the following tests: Energy vs ionized plasma brightness,
brightness vs pulse peak, simultaneously addressed voxels for
aerial images, and skin damage. In the experiments, the
brightness are measured as a summation of all the pixel values
within an close-up image of the plasma taken by a digital
camera, which is a common definition in the field of laser optics.
We tested not only gas-ionized plasma, but also photon
absorption and cavitation, in order to compare the various
energy consumption performances and the means of applying
the femtosecond laser system to the display technology. All
experiments were conducted using System A, which is described
in Section 4.
Table 4: Specifications of varifocal lens.

Figure 9: Spectra of 100-fs, 30-fs, and 269-fs lasers (from left to right). The rightmost is the peak intensity and the pulse width of
each femtosecond lasers.

5.1

Experiments overview

In this study, we aim to propose a femtosecond laser-based
display system design. In conventional studies, the
requirements, scalability, and safety of such laser-based
systems are not thoroughly discussed. There are several factors
that we should explore. In Section 5.2, we examine the voxel
brightness, which is important in relation to the energy and
display spatiotemporal resolution, as discussed in Section 3. In
Section 5.3, we explore the relationship between pulse duration
and brightness. This is important for scalability, particularly
when a faster laser source is developed. In Section 5.4, we
explore simultaneously addressed voxels with SLM. This is
important for scalability in accordance with increasing
spatiotemporal resolution. Then, in Section 5.5, we examine
safety issues and the effect of the plasma on skin. This is
important as this technology is intended for widespread,
general use. Finally, in Section 5.6, we examine audible sound
from the plasma generated by femtosecond lasers. This is
important as this technology is intended to be used in our daily
lives.

5.2

Energy vs Brightness

We conducted this experiment to evaluate the relationship
between the plasma-production energy level and the resultant
brightness of the image. In conventional studies, the minimum
peak intensity necessary to produce the ionized plasma is
estimated. However, this experiment aimed to confirm the
feasibility of our system and to investigate how it can be applied
to display voxels and, thus the minimum peak intensity value
was determined.
We conducted the experiments using System A (30 fs) and
employed a microscope to capture the resultant image. With our
setup, the laser source can provide power of up to 7W, however,
unwanted breakdown occurs in the light path before the
objective lens under too high power. Hence, the full power of the
laser source cannot be used. Moreover, the energy capacity of
our SLM is not guaranteed over 2 W. The experiments were
conducted for a power range of 0.05 to 1.00 W.
Figure 10 (30 fs) shows the experimental setup and results. The
experiments were conducted under energies per pulse of 0.16 to
0.55 mJ. The 30-fs laser can produce plasma from 0.2-mJ pulse
energy. The cross-sectional area of the focal point is
theoretically calculated to be 2 × 10-7 cm2. Then, the peak
intensity is 36 PW/cm2 and surely higher than the ionized
plasma threshold (> 1 PW/cm2).

5.3

(a) Setup.

Brightness vs pulse peak

(b) Results.
Figure 10: Experimental setup and results on brightness of

light emission in air induced by 30-fs and 100-fs lasers.

The relationship between the pulse peak and the resultant
image brightness was also examined, as the peak intensity
plays an important role in plasma generation. This experiment
aimed to classify systems of different pulse width in terms of
display voxel brightness.
As previously, we conducted experiments using System A (30
and 100 fs). Pulses of 30 and 100 fs yield different spectra and
peak energies for the same average powers. Also, the 30-fs
setting yields a three-fold higher peak pulse. We employed the
same microscope to capture the image that was used in Section
5.1 and the results are shown in Figure 10. The experiments
were conducted for a power range of 0.05 to 1.00 W.
As a result, it was found that a 100-fs laser can generate
plasma from 0.45-mJ pulse energy. Then, the peak intensity is
24 PW/cm2 and surely higher than the ionized plasma threshold
(> 1 PW/cm2). Besides, it is confirmed that the 30-fs pulse
requires less energy than the 100-fs pulse to produce plasma
under the same average power.

Figure 11: Experimental results on brightness of light emission
in air, water, and fluorescence solution induced by 30-fs laser.

Figure 14: Experimental results on noise level vs. brightness of

Additionally, we conducted other experiments comparing media
materials (air, water, and fluorescence solution). The results are
shown in Figure 11. It shows that the values of required pulse
energy are dramatically different depending on the media
materials.

the damage to skin structure caused by femtosecond plasma
exposure. We employed leather for these experiments, as a
substitute for human skin.

5.4

Simultaneously addressed voxels

One of the main contributions of this paper is the application of
SLM to in-air laser plasma graphics. This enables
simultaneously addressed voxels using CGHs. (Note that, in
conventional systems [Kimura et al. 2006; Saito et al. 2008],
multiple voxels were not generated simultaneously.)
Simultaneous addressing is important to increase the
spatiotemporal resolution although the simultaneously
addressed voxels are darker than a single point because the
energy is distributed among them. This experiment was
designed to explore the resolution scalability by using SLM
with a single light source. Simultaneous addressing is available
for both the lateral (X, Y) and beam (Z) axes, by displaying
appropriate holograms on a single SLM. Here, we investigated
simultaneous addressing for the lateral axis. Again, the
experiments were conducted using System A (30 fs), and Figure
12 shows the results and the holographic images used in the
SLM. We employed the same microscope shown in Figure 10.
We conducted experiments with a laser power from 0.05 to 1.84
W. We had 1 to 4 simultaneously addressed voxels and 5 or
more voxels were not visible.

5.5

Skin damage

Another main contribution of this paper is estimating the safety
of femtosecond laser systems. Plasma has high energy and can
be harmful to humans. However a femtosecond pulse is an
ultrashort pulse laser, which is used for non-heat breaking for
industrial purposes. It is also used for ultra-short scale
fabrication of sub-micrometer order. Thus, we supposed that
such pulses may not damage human skin seriously. In addition,
our display scans a 3D space very rapidly, therefore, the laser
spot does not remain at a specific point for a long period. On the
other hand, this plasma still poses dangers for the retina.
However, we believe that the potential for general application
still exists with appropriate installation.
Therefore, we conducted this particular experiment to explore

light emission. The background noise level was 55.7 dB SPL.

The experiments were conducted using System A (30 fs and 1 W,
100 fs and 1 W) and the plasma exposure duration was varied
between 50 and 6,000 ms. Figure 13 shows the results. It was
found that the 30- and 100-fs pulses have almost the same
effect on the skin. As we described previously, the 30-fs pulse
has a three-fold greater peak energy and can generate brighter
voxels. However 50 ms includes 50 shots and there is almost no
difference between the 30-fs and 100-fs results. In this
experiment, the average power is the factor determining the
result. For exposure of under 2,000 ms (2,000 shots), only
100-μm-diameter holes appeared and there was no heat
damage to the leather. For a period of longer than 2,000 ms,
heat effects were observed around the holes.
We conducted a test with a nanosecond laser for comparison
with this result. With the nanosecond laser, the leather burned
within 100 ms. This means that pulse duration, repetition
times, and energy are important factors affecting the level of
damage caused by the laser. Hence, this laser is somewhat safe
for use. Further, there are two ways in which the laser can be
used safely. One is as an ultra-short-pulse laser, which is bright
and has an average output that is not highly intensive. The
other is by increasing the scanning speed.

5.6

Noise level

The laser plasma in air radiates not only visible light but also
audible sound. We conducted an experiment to evaluate the
radiated sound. The position of the laser plasma was fixed. The
laser power was set at 1.0 and 1.2W. The pulse width was set at
40, 60, 80, 100 fs. The noise level was measured by a noise level
meter (NL-52, Rion Co., Ltd.), which was placed at 20 mm from
the laser plasma. The background noise level was 55.7 dB SPL.
The brightness of laser plasma was also recorded.
The results are shown in Figure 14. The maximum noise level
was 77.2 dB SPL with 40-fs pulses which also radiate the
brightest. This noise level was not so annoying subjectively and
it is acceptable in our daily lives. The brighter plasma emission
tends to be accompanied by the louder sound. 40-fs pulses
radiate louder sound and brighter light.

Figure 12: Experimental results on simultaneous addressing. One to four addressing were tested. The intensity is the normalized

value of the summation of all the pixel values of the photos of the voxels, which is taken a evaluative value of brightness.

Figure 13: Experimental results on skin damage. Leather sheets were exposed to the 30-fs and 100-fs lasers and the irradiation
time was controlled. The exposure longer than 2,000 ms burns the leather surface.

6

Applications

In this section, we describe potential applications of our system.
We introduce a 3D aerial display system and interaction
between the system and users (Figure 2).

6.1

Aerial displays

In this subsection, we describe our aerial display using laser
plasma. We developed our application for both Systems A and B
and the results are shown in Figures 15 (a), (b), and (d). For
Systems A and B, the workspaces are 1 and 8 mm3, respectively.
These workspaces are smaller than those of conventional
studies, but their resolutions are 10 to 200 times higher than
conventional methods. The maximum spatiotemporal
resolution is 4,000 point/s (with 4 simultaneous addressing) for

Figure 15: Results of aerial rendering. (Uppermost) The setups of systems A and B. (a) The SIGGRAPH logo, (b) a cylinder, (c) a

"heart" that is broken by touch, (d) a "fairy," (e) "sprouts" coming out from seeds, (f) a light point that changes into a "jewel" in
contact with a ring, (g) direct interaction between a light point and a finger.

System A and 200,000 point/s for System B. The image frame
rate is determined by the number of vertices used in the image.
6.1.1

Spatial AR to real-world object

This aerial display can be used with real-world objects, as
shown in Figures 15 (e) and (f). One of the merits of the spatial
AR to real-world object technique is the AR content is on the
same scale as that of the object that is overlapped. Also, this
system was developed with a microscope, which can detect an
object in the workspace, overlap it with contents, and modify
the contents when a contact between the object and plasma
occurs. This has an advantage over conventional AR approaches
in terms of correspondence to the 3D spatial position. Digital
content and information are directly provided in a 3D space
instead of a 2D computer display.
6.1.2

Aerial interaction with aerial content

Our system has the unique characteristic that the plasma is
touchable. It was found that the contact between plasma and a
finger causes a brighter light. This effect can be used as a cue of
the contact. Figures 15 (c) and (g) show examples of this
interaction. One possible control is touch interaction in which
floating images change when touched by a user. The other is
damage reduction. For safety, the plasma voxels are shut off
within a single frame (17 ms = 1/60 s) when users touch the
voxels. This is sufficiently less than the harmful exposure time
(2,000 ms) determined in section 5.4.
6.1.3

Haptic Feedback on Aerial Images

Shock waves are generated by plasma when a user touches the
plasma voxels. Then the user feels an impulse on the finger as if
the light has physical substance. The detailed investigation of
the characteristics of this plasma-generated haptic sensation
with sophisticated spatiotemporal control is beyond the scope of

this paper.
However, example applications such as “an aerial check box”
are at least expected. Figure 15 shows the interaction between
the user and the aerial image.

7
7.1

Discussion
Laser-induced emission phenomena

There are two laser-induced emission phenomena other than
plasma emission: Fluorescence and diffusion by cavitation, as
introduced in Section 3.1. Both can be applied to displays using
the laser-and-SLM system. In this section, the differences
between the emission phenomena are explained.
The display medium is the key factor determining the potential
interactions. While plasma is generated in air, fluorescence
requires fluorescent materials (ink, pigment, etc.) and
cavitation requires a fluid medium. The medium also
determines the energy that is required to emit light. The order
of the required energy decreases from air (PW/cm2), water, to
fluorescent materials (MW/cm2).
The available wavelengths also differ in these cases. The
plasma color is wavelength-independent and, hence, it is
reasonable to use invisible wavelengths, e.g., infrared or
ultraviolet. In the case of fluorescence, multi-electron
fluorescence is reasonable, in which multiple photons are
absorbed by molecules and a single photon with shorter
wavelength. Full-color rendering is possible by using multiple
fluorescent materials. This is acceptable because the invisible
ultraviolet source leaves only the emission visible. On the other
hand, when applying cavitation in water, a visible wavelength
should be used, because the incoming wavelength is diffused by
the microbubbles and observed. This feature leads to full-color
rendering with multiple lasers of different colors.
The softness of the medium determines the possible forms of
interaction. With aerial plasma in air, a user can insert their
hand in to the workspace and touch the plasma. This is also
possible with non-fluorescent/fluorescent liquid media. However,
in the case of a fluorescent solid medium, the voxels cannot be
touched directly.

7.2

Drawbacks and limitations

There are some disadvantages and limitations to our systems.
As previously explained, SLM is not resistant to an intense
laser and, therefore, we cannot use full-range laser power to
exhibit images in air. Currently, the SLM technology is popular
because of the recent development. We are optimistic that a
new kind of SLM system with higher reflectance efficiency will
solve this limitation in future. Then more numbers of
simultaneously addressed voxels can be generated.
In addition, the optical circuit should be developed and treated
carefully. Because our system utilizes high-intensity lasers,
ionization may occur on the route of the optical circuit. This also
limits the available laser power and damages optical
components if ionization occurs. Further, plasma generation is
a non-linear phenomenon. These should be well considered for
safety.
Also, the focusing and aberration are limitations of our systems.
We have to focus the light to make focal points to generate

aerial plasma. Then the aperture of the objective lens
determines the maximum workspace, which limits the angle
range of the galvano mirror. In addition, high-speed variation of
the varifocal lens would cause an aberration problem. The
characteristics of these lenses are important in developing the
optical circuit.

7.3
7.3.1

Scalability
Size of workspace

Scalability in size of workspace is main concern of our project.
Aerial plasma is mainly limited by the objective lens after the
varifocal lens. Laser plasma generation needs a laser power of
PW/cm2, and the objective lens is required for this purpose. The
larger aperture of objective lens permits the larger angle range
of the galvano mirror, i.e. XY scanning.
Compare to laser plasma, the laser power to excite fluorescents
and water is small and the objective lens is not required. Then,
their workspaces are limited by the angle range of galvano
mirror and depth range of varifocal lens.
7.3.2

Number of voxels

We have to develop three factors to scale up our system for daily
applications; increasing power of laser source, shortening pulse
width to increase peak power, and increasing scanning speed.
These enable us to have an amount of simultaneously
addressed and scanned voxels within a single frame, keeping
visible and touchable features.
The more laser power leads to more simultaneously addressed
voxels. The laser power is limited by the safety on skin,
unwanted ionization on the route of optical circuit, and the
reflection/transmission characteristics of optical devices.
Shortening pulse width has two benefits. One is a higher
repetition frequency (i.e. dots per second), keeping a high peak
power required for plasma generation. The other is more safety
on human skin because of lower amount of pulse energy with a
fixed peak power.
Galvano mirror and varifocal lens have a small room to improve
scanning speed. Employing multiple laser systems is one of the
solutions to generate multiple voxels.
7.3.3

Refresh rate

The refresh rate of this system is determined by the number of
simultaneously addressed voxels by SLM, the refresh rate of
SLM, the scanning speed of galvano mirror, and the response
time of varifocal lens. The galvano mirror is the fastest, more
than 1 kHz, and the others work at less than 100 Hz. It is hence
reasonable to use galvano mirror mainly. In addition, SLM can
multiply voxels if its low refresh rate is acceptable. Then the
multiplied voxels move together by galvano scanning.

7.4

Safety

Class 4 laser sources are used in this paper. The proposed
display system was carefully designed and operated based on
the
International
Electrotechnical
Commission
(IEC)
60825-1:2014. There are two concerns regarding the safety of
laser: the damages on eyes and skin. It should be avoided for
users to see the laser beam directly. While laser plasma emits

visible light in all directions at the focal point and users can see
it safely from the side of the laser beam, it is recommended for
users to wear glasses with infrared filters until this display
technology is well matured and the safety for eyes is confirmed.
There are a few reports on damage of skin by femtosecond
lasers. The minimum visible lesion thresholds for porcine skin
for pulsed lasers were evaluated in [Cain et al. 2007]. The ED50
for a femtosecond laser (44 fs, 810 nm, and 12 mm spot size)
was determined as 21 mJ from the observation that the lesions
by the lasers less than that energy value disappeared at 24
hours after the exposure. The energy (2 mJ and 50 μJ for Lasers
A and B, respectively) and spot size (less than 10 μm) are much
smaller, and we expect that damages by these femtosecond
lasers are negligible. We also investigated the exposure time in
this paper. The result shows that there was a discontinuous
expansion of the damaged area when the exposure time comes
up to 2,000 ms. We can minimize the damage by keeping the
exposure time less than 2,000 ms by, for example, feedback
control based on detection of brighter plasma emission at the
surface of the finger in contact with aerial laser plasma.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced a system for rendering volumetric
graphics in air using a femtosecond laser. Aerial laser-induced
plasma emits light without interaction with any physical
matter, while one advantage of the femtosecond-laser display
system is that it is safer than a system using a nanosecond
laser.
There are two methods for rendering graphics in air with a
femtosecond laser: Holograms by spatial light modulation
technology and the scanning of a laser beam by a galvano
mirror. The hologram size and workspace of the current system
have maximum values of 1-cm2 and 5-cm3, respectively.
Although these demonstrated sizes are currently too small to be
used in the applications shown in Figure 2, this study is the
first step to discuss and design laser-based aerial volumetric
displays. These sizes are scalable depending on the optical
devices and setup.
This paper reports the details of the theoretical principles,
system setup, and experimental evaluations, and also discusses
scalability, limitations, and applications. Although we focus on
laser-induced plasma, the same considerations can be applied to
other emission techniques such as fluorescence and cavitation.

References
AMMOSOV, M. V., DELONE, N. B., AND KRAINOV, V. P. 1986. Tunnel
ionization of complex atoms and of atomic ions in an alternating
electromagnetic field. Soviet Physics - JETP 64, 6, 1191-1194.
BARNUM, P. C., NARASIMHAN, S. G., AND KANADE, T. 2010. A
multi-layered display with water drops. ACM Trans. Graph. 29, 4 (July),
76:1-76:7.
BENGTSSON, J. 1994. Kinoform design with an optimal-rotationangle
method. Appl. Opt. 33, 29 (Oct), 6879-6884.
BENZIE, P., WATSON, J., SURMAN, P., RAKKOLAINEN, I., HOPF, K.,
UREY, H., SAINOV, V., AND VON KOPYLOW, C. 2007. A survey of
3dtv displays: Techniques and technologies. Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on 17, 11 (Nov), 1647-1658.
CAIN, C. P., ROACH, W. P., STOLARSKI, D. J., NOOJIN, G. D.,
KUMRU, S. S., STOCKTON, K. L., ZOHNER, J. J., AND ROCKWELL,

B. A. 2007. Infrared laser damage thresholds for skin at wavelengths
from 0.810 to 1.54 microns for femto-to-microsecond pulse durations. In
Proc. SPIE, vol. 6435, 64350W-64350W-12.
CLAR, J., 2008. traffic.
http://www.viatraffic.org/index.php?page=3ddisplay-cube-v4 Last
accessed on 20 Jan. 2015.
DENK, W., STRICKLER, J., AND WEBB, W. 1990. Two-photon laser
scanning fluorescence microscopy. Science 248, 4951, 73-76.
DOWNING, E., HESSELINK, L., RALSTON, J., AND MACFARLANE,
R. 1996. A three-color, solid-state, three-dimensional display. Science
273, 5279, 1185-1189.
EITOKU, S., TANIKAWA, T., AND SUZUKI, Y. 2006. Display composed
of water drops for filling space with materialized virtual
three-dimensional objects. In Virtual Reality Conference, 2006,
159-166.
FAVALORA, G. E., NAPOLI, J., HALL, D. M., DORVAL, R. K.,
GIOVINCO, M., RICHMOND, M. J., AND CHUN, W. S. 2002.
100-million-voxel volumetric display. In Proc. SPIE, vol. 4712, 300-312.
FOLLMER, S., LEITHINGER, D., OLWAL, A., HOGGE, A., AND ISHII,
H. 2013. inform: Dynamic physical affordances and constraints through
shape and object actuation. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, ACM, New
York, NY, USA, UIST ’13, 417-426.
GROSSMAN, T., AND BALAKRISHNAN, R. 2006. The design and
evaluation of selection techniques for 3d volumetric displays. In
Proceedings of the 19th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, ACM, New York, NY, USA, UIST ’06, 3-12.
HASEGAWA, S., AND HAYASAKI, Y. 2013. Liquid volumetric display
with parallel optical access by computer-generated hologram. In Digital
Holography and Three-Dimensional Imaging, Optical Society of
America, DTh2A.7.
HASHIDA, T., KAKEHI, Y., AND NAEMURA, T. 2011. Photochromic
sculpture: Volumetric color-forming pixels. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011
Emerging Technologies, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ’11,
11:1-11:1.
HAYASAKI, Y., SUGIMOTO, T., TAKITA, A., AND NISHIDA, N. 2005.
Variable holographic femtosecond laser processing by use
of a spatial light modulator. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 3.
HOSHI, T., TAKAHASHI, M., NAKATSUMA, K., AND SHINODA, H.
2009. Touchable holography. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2009 Emerging
Technologies, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ‘09, 23:1-23:1.
ISHIKAWA, H., AND SAITO, H. 2008. Closed-line based representation
of 3d shape for point cloud for laser plasma scanning 3d display. Proc.
18th International Conference on Artificial Reality and Telexistence
(ICAT08), Yokohama, Japan, Dec., 28-35.
ISHIKAWA, H., AND SAITO, H. 2008. Point cloud representation of 3d
shape for laser-plasma scanning 3d display. In Industrial Electronics,
2008. IECON 2008. 34th Annual Conference of IEEE, 1913-1918.
ISHIKAWA, H., WATANABE, H., AOKI, S., SAITO, H., SHIMADA, S.,
KAKEHATA, M., TSUKADA, Y., AND KIMURA, H. 2011. Surface
representation of 3d object for aerial 3d display. In Proc. SPIE, vol. 7863,
78630X-78630X-8.
IWATA, H., YANO, H., NAKAIZUMI, F., AND KAWAMURA, R. 2001.
Project feelex: Adding haptic surface to graphics. In Proceedings of the
28th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ‘01, 469-476.
JANSSON, D. G., AND BERLIN, E. P. 1979. A three-dimensional
computer display. In First Annual Conference of Computer Graphics in

CAD/ CAM System, 1979.
JONES, A., MCDOWALL, I., YAMADA, H., BOLAS, M., AND
DEBEVEC, P. 2007. Rendering for an interactive 360 deg light field
display. ACM Trans. Graph. 26, 3 (July).
KARNIK, A., HENDERSON, A., DEAN, A., PANG, H., CAMPBELL, T.,
SAKURAI, S., HERRMANN, G., IZADI, S., KITAMURA, Y., AND
SUBRAMANIAN, S. 2011. Vortex: Design and implementation of an
interactive volumetric display. In CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA, CHI
EA ’11, 2017-2022.
KELDYSH, L. V. 1965. Ionization in the field of a strong
electromagnetic wave. Soviet Physics JETP 20 (May), 1307-1314.
KIMURA, H., UCHIYAMA, T., AND YOSHIKAWA, H. 2006. Laser
produced 3d display in the air. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Emerging
Technologies, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ’06.
KIMURA, H., ASANO, A., FUJISHIRO, I., NAKATANI, A., AND
WATANABE, H. 2011. True 3d display. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011
Emerging Technologies, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ‘11,
20:1-20:1.
LEE, C., DIVERDI, S., AND HOLLERER, T. 2009. Depth-fused 3d
imagery on an immaterial display. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 15,
1, 20-33.
LEE, J., POST, R., AND ISHII, H. 2011. Zeron: Mid-air tangible
interaction enabled by computer controlled magnetic levitation. In
Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology, ACM, New York, NY, USA, UIST ’11, 327-336.
MACFARLANE, D. L. 1994. Volumetric three-dimensional display. Appl.
Opt. 33 (November), 7453-7457.
MASIA, B., WETZSTEIN, G., DIDYK, P., AND GUTIERREZ, D. 2013. A
survey on computational displays: Pushing the boundaries of optics,
computation, and perception. Computers & Graphics 37, 8, 1012-1038.
MATOBA, Y., TOKUI, T., SATO, R., SATO, T., AND KOIKE, H. 2012.
Splashdisplay: Volumetric projection using projectile beads. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2012 Emerging Technologies, ACM, New York, NY, USA,
SIGGRAPH ’12, 19:1-19:1.
OCHIAI, Y., HOSHI, T., OYAMA, A., AND REKIMOTO, J. 2013.
Poppable display: A display that enables popping, breaking, and tearing
interactions with people. In Consumer Electronics (GCCE), 2013 IEEE
2nd Global Conference on, 124-128.
OCHIAI, Y., HOSHI, T., AND REKIMOTO, J. 2014. Pixie dust:
Graphics generated by levitated and animated objects in computational
acoustic-potential field. ACM Trans. Graph. 33, 4 (July), 85:1-85:13.
PADDOCK, S. 1999. Confocal laser scanning microscopy. Biotechniques
27, 5, 992-1004.
PARKER, E. 1948. Three-dimensional cathode-ray tube displays.
Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers - Part III: Radio and
Communication Engineering 95 (September), 371-387(16).
PEREIRA, T., RUSINKIEWICZ, S., AND MATUSIK, W. 2014.
Computational light routing: 3d printed optical fibers for sensing and
display. ACM Trans. Graph. 33, 3 (June), 24:1-24:13.
PERLIN, K., AND HAN, J., 2006. Volumetric display with dust as the
participating medium, Feb. 14. US Patent 6,997,558.
POUPYREV, I., NASHIDA, T., MARUYAMA, S., REKIMOTO, J., AND
YAMAJI, Y. 2004. Lumen: Interactive visual and shape display for calm
computing. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2004 Emerging Technologies, ACM,
New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ’04, 17-.

RAKKOLAINEN, I., DIVERDI, S., OLWAL, A., CANDUSSI, N., H¨U
LLERER, T., LAITINEN, M., PIIRTO, M., AND PALOVUORI, K. 2005.
The interactive fogscreen. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Emerging
Technologies, ACM, New York, NY,
USA, SIGGRAPH ’05.
RAKKOLAINEN, I., DIVERDI, S., OLWAL, A., CANDUSSI, N., H¨U
LLERER, T., LAITINEN, M., PIIRTO, M., AND PALOVUORI, K. 2005.
The interactive fogscreen. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Emerging
Technologies, ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ’05.
SAITO, H., KIMURA, H., SHIMADA, S., NAEMURA, T., KAYAHARA,
J., JARUSIRISAWAD, S., NOZICK, V., ISHIKAWA, H., MURAKAMI, T.,
AOKI, J., ASANO, A., KIMURA, T., KAKEHATA, M., SASAKI, F.,
YASHIRO, H., MORI, M., TORIZUKA, K., AND INO, K. 2008.
Laser-plasma scanning 3d display for putting digital contents in free
space. Proc. SPIE 6803, 680309-680309-10.
SOLTAN, P., TRIAS, J. A., ROBINSON, W. R., AND DAHLKE, W. J.
1992. Laser-based 3-d volumetric display system. In Proc. SPIE, vol.
1664, 177-192.
SULLIVAN, A. 2004. Depthcube solid-state 3d volumetric display. In
Proc. SPIE, vol. 5291, 279-284.
SUTHERLAND, I. E. 1968. A head-mounted three dimensional display.
In Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer
Conference, Part I, ACM, New York, NY, USA, AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I),
757-764.
WILLIS, K., BROCKMEYER, E., HUDSON, S., AND POUPYREV, I.
2012. Printed optics: 3d printing of embedded optical elements for
interactive devices. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, ACM, New York, NY, USA,
UIST ’12, 589-598.
YOSHIDA, T., KAMURO, S., MINAMIZAWA, K., NII, H., AND TACHI,
S. 2010. Repro3d: Full-parallax 3d display using retro-reflective
projection technology. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Emerging Technologies,
ACM, New York, NY, USA, SIGGRAPH ‘10, 20:1-20:1.

