Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

A Half-Implant Device on Fingernails
Emi Tamaki
Waseda University
2-579-15, Mikajima
Tokorozawa, Saitama 3591192 JAPAN
hoimei@acm.org
Ken Iwasaki
H2L, Inc.
4F, 3-17, Kandajimbocho
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 1010051 JAPAN
iwkn@acm.org

Figure 1. Prototype of the half-implant device on the nail.

Abstract
Hand gesture feedback systems using tactile or

The UV gel is used to glue the parts onto the user’s nail
and cover the parts meant to be waterproof. The device
receives power from the RF antenna; therefore, it does
not require a battery to function. It notifies whether the
finger is in a target site by lighting an LED or activating
a vibration motor. The primary benefit of this device is
that the user can feel hand gesture feedback, anytime
and anywhere. The device can be placed on the users’
fingernail for approximately three weeks. To verify the
devices’ influence on the users’ pointing task, we
conducted a preliminary user study. The task success
rate was 100% over the sessions with tactile and visual
feedback and 97% without feedback. The experiment
revealed that the tactile notification reduced the task
time by 12.3 % compared to that of the test with no
feedback.

visual information can only be used in given
situations because of the limitations of the device

Author Keywords

features such as the need for a battery. In this

Half implant; Nail; Fingertip; RF (Radio Frequency);
Tactile; Haptic; Tangible; Wearable; Design

paper, we propose a half-implant device located
on the fingernail. The half-implant device consists
of a radio frequency (RF) receiving antenna, small

ACM Classification Keywords

electronic parts, and UV gel.

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI): User Interfaces.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other
uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
CHI 2014, Apr 26 - May 01, 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada.
ACM 978-1-4503-2474-8/14/04.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2581293

Introduction
Many hand gesture input systems have been suggested
in HCI (Human-Computer Interaction) and Ubiquitous
Computing. Hand gesture input systems must be
adapted to anytime and anywhere. Can we use tactile
feedback anytime and anywhere without touchable

1447

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

hand gesture devices? In this paper, we focus on a
feedback device that can be used anytime and
anywhere. Feedback devices for hand gesture input are
classified as touch panel, room-mounted, and wearable
type. These three device-types are described in the
following:
Touch panel-type devices: Touch panel-type devices
[1-4] generate sound, visual, and tactile feedback
through the touch panel by recognizing a user’s hand
gesture on the panel. They can be used without the
learning of consistent pointing because the input
sensors and feedback actuators are set in the same
place. User can only perform hand gesture input
when they place their hand on the panel. Moreover,
there can only be limited hand gesture variations
because it requires the user’s hand to be in constant
contact with the panel. Finally, the device can only
be used in 2D space.
Room-mounted-type devices: Room-mounted-type
devices give the user sound and visual feedback
using a speaker and projector [5, 6]. There are few
tactile feedback devices in this group. As an
exception, a room-mounted-type device can include
tactile feedback using airborne ultrasound [7, 8]. The
device can give a user a tactile feeling anywhere.
However, the device only generates a maximum 0.8
gf (gram-force) [7]. This is too weak to notify the
user if he is doing other things.
Wearable-type devices: Wearable-type devices vary
according to the kind of feedback. In this section,
hand-gesture-input feedbacks are discussed.
For visual feedback, HMD (Head Mounted Display)
devices such as Google glass [9] and AiRScouter

[10] are available. The HMD devices have become
small and lightweight and look like eyeglasses.
However, HMD devices must be removed in some
situations, for example, in bedrooms and bathrooms,
for the user’s safety. A small projector can also be
used as a wearable feedback device. Sixth Sense
[11] and BrainyHand [12] are two systems that have
a battery and a small camera for detecting user hand
gestures and include a small projector as the visual
feedback. These devices are placed on the user’s
head or neck. The two systems do not hinder the
user’s daily gestures and the visual feedback is
projected on the user’s hand. Users can input hand
gestures everywhere. However, the two systems
require a boot command or switch because the
user’s daily hand gestures could be mixed with hand
gesture commands if the systems are always
detecting user hand gestures. Both systems require
a battery that must be carried by the user, for
mobile use. For these reasons, these systems are
unsuitable for quick hand-gesture input in daily use.
For sound feedback, wearable, mass-consumption
Bluetooth earphones [13] can be used. However, the
earphones would also have to be removed in some
situations, for the same reasons as the HMD devices.
For tactile feedback, Master Slave [14] and TELESAR
[15] are suggested. Both devices give the user a
tactile feeling using glove-type devices. Master Slave
and TELESAR allow the user to control a robot hand.
The tactile feeling is synchronized with the robot
hand’s feeling. We cannot use these devices on a
daily basis because they cover the user’s hand and
inhibit hand motion. In order not to cover the user’s
hand, PossessedHand [16] is an option.

1448

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

PossessedHand controls the user’s finger-joint
movements using non-invasive EMS (Electric muscle
stimulation) around the user’s arm. To maintain the
health of the skin and muscle, PossessedHand can
only be used for limited time periods.

Figure 2. Implementation of the nail attach
of the half-implant device.

Exceptions: Ubi-Finger [17] and Implanted User
Interface [18] use the behavior of the controlled
device as the feedback. Ubi-Finger is designed for
inputting finger gestures in a ubiquitous
environment. These devices allow users to select a
target device to control using a pointing-finger
gesture. They do cover the user’s finger pad;
however, the electric leads hinder the user’s daily
gestures.
Nail-mounted feedback devices have been suggested
[19, 20, 21]. In these projects, feedback devices are
set on the user’s fingernail and do not cover the
user’s finger pad. These devices, however, are wired
to a power supply.

Our Goal

Figure 3: How to set the half-implant device
on a nail. (1) File off the nail surface. (2)
Coat the nail surface with the UV gel as a
base coat. (3) Harden the base coat using
UV light irradiation. (4) Set the half-implant
device on the base coat. (5) Coat the halfimplant device and the nail with UV gel as a
topcoat and harden the topcoat. (6) Finish.

Feedbacks that could be used as a starting point for
hand gesture have been proposed. However, for
anytime and anywhere usage, the following criteria are
required: 1. Device must be wireless, lightweight,
small, and safe. 2. Device must be usable in both dark
and bright spaces. 3. Device cannot cover the hand. 4.
Device cannot make noise. 5. Device must work
without battery (or work with a lightweight and rapidly
chargeable battery).
Our goal is to suggest a feedback device that meets the
above criteria. For anytime and anywhere usage, we
must be able to attach the tactile device on the user’s

body for 24 hours or more. In addition, the tactile
device must be waterproof so it can be used anywhere.

Half-implant device
In this paper, a half-implant device (for tactile and
visual-feedback) is described. We made a prototype of
the device for a user’s fingernail. Figure 1 shows the
prototype. This device consists of a vibration motor or
LED, RF (Radio frequency) receiving antenna, a
capacitor, a rectifier diode, and UV gel. The power and
vibration pattern are supplied from the magnetic field.
The UV gel can be applied to the user’s nail to bind the
other parts and cover the parts to be waterproof. To
apply the UV gel, the nail surface is filed off. Then, the
UV gel is spread on the roughened nail surface. The
parts are then securely fixed on the user’s nail (Fig. 2).
Figure 3 shows the process to install the parts on the
user’s nail. The UV gel is hardened by UV light
irradiation. “UV GEL FSM Clear” is used as the UV gel.
This gel is normally sold for artificial nails. It takes
approximately 20 minutes to mount the device. In our
study, the half-implanted device was fixed for five
weeks. However, the device should be removed before
three weeks because the user’s fingernail does grow
out.
To supply the power, an RF (Radio frequency) receiving
antenna, which is a small coil, is used. The inductance
of the coil is set to 17.0~18.0 μH for the
electromagnetic coupling. A 0.2 mm diameter tinned
line is used. The inner diameter of the coil is set to 15.0
mm. The outside diameter of the coil is set to 18.0 mm
(Fig. 4). A wireless charging module (POW01141B) by
SeeedStudio is used. From the transmission antenna,
our receiving antenna captures alternating current.

1449

Work-in-Progress

18mm
15mm

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

Tactile feedback-type
The tactile feedback device activates vibration motor.
We install a rectifier diode (40V, 600mA) in the circuit
of our device because the vibration motor (FM34F) by
T.P.C is designed to run on DC (Direct Current)
electricity. For noise rejection, a capacitor is also
included in our device. The vibration motor uses
2.5V~3V, 50~90mA through the circuit.
Visual feedback-type
The visual feedback device (Fig. 5) consists of a
receiving antenna (3.0~5.0μH) and an LED. An
LST676-R (20mA) is used for the LED.

The experimental space (24.0cm x 27.0cm) is located
on a desk. The transmission antenna (target site) is
also placed on the desk, hidden under a cover. From
the change of antenna’s current caused by
electromagnetic coupling, we detected whether the
participants place their hand over the correct location.
Participants
Four volunteers (2 male, 2 female), ranging in age from
20 to 40 years old, participated in our experiment.
(Mean (M) = 32, Standard Deviation (SD) = 5.4). All
participants were right-handed and used our devices on
the index fingers of their right hand.

Figure 4. Close-up of the prototype
device with the vibrator

Experiments
To verify the devices’ influence on the users’ pointing
task, we conducted a preliminary user study. In our
experiments, determining the kind of feedback suitable
to assist users in locating the place to input information
quickly and accurately, is examined. Tactile feedback
with a vibration actuator and visual feedback with a
LED that meet the requirements of our objective (‘Our
Goal’) are considered. As a standard experiment, the
absence of feedback is compared with tactile and visual
feedback.

Figure 5. Close-up of the prototype
device with the LED

Hypothesis
Tactile and visual feedback will help users locate the
place to input information quickly and accurately. In
addition, for information input, tactile and visual
feedback will be more effective than the absence of
feedback.

Procedure
First, an experimenter pointed the target site (2.0cm x
2.0 cm) located in the experimental space (24.0cm x
27.0cm) to the subjects. The antennas were covered,
so the subjects had to memorize the approximate
position on the plain cover.
Second, the subjects set their hand in a fixed start
position. They then moved their hand to the target site.
Then, they returned their hand to the fixed start
position. They repeated the pointing task ten times as
quickly as possible. The subjects repeated this activity
five times (five sessions). Before the start of each
session, the experimenter changed the location of the
antennas randomly. Fifty pointing trials were measured
for each condition.
With these conditions, each subject performed 150
trials. In this experiment, the difference of the
efficiency and speed was measured. The results are
described in the following subsections.

Apparatus
Two types of half-implant devices are used, the tactile
feedback-type and the visual feedback-type.

1450

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

Result: Accuracy
Task success rate of this experiment is shown in Figure
6. With visual feedback and tactile feedback, the task
success rate is 100% over all sessions. The Task
success rate lowers to 97% with no feedback condition.

Figure 6. Results of the efficiency of each
condition. With feedback, the gesture is
100% successful.

Result: Speed
The average time for one task in the three conditions is
shown in Figure 7. The average time shows a difference
among the conditions (21.0 seconds with no feedback,
21.23 seconds with visual feedback condition, and
18.38 seconds with tactile feedback condition). In other
words, the tactile notification reduced the task time by
12.3 % compared to that of the test with no feedback.
The variance also shows a difference over the
conditions (0.58 with no feedback, 1.83 with visual
feedback condition, and 0.88 with our device).

References
[1]

Rekimoto, J. SmartSkin: an infrastructure for
freehand manipulation on interactive surfaces. ACM
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. No. 8(2002) pp.
113-120.

[2]

Jefferson, H.Y. Low-cost multi-touch sensing
through frustrated total internal reflection. ACM
Proceedings of the 18th annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology (2005).
pp.115-118.

[3]

Kajimoto, H. Skeletouch: transparent electro-tactile
display for mobile surfaces. ACM SIGGRAPH Asia
2012 Emerging Technologies (2012). pp. 21:121:3.

[4]

Sato, M., Poupyrev, I., and Harrison, C. Touché:
Enhancing Touch Interaction on Humans, Screens,
Liquids, and Everyday Objects. ACM Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. No. 10, pp. 483-492(2012).

[5]

G-Speak. oblong industries, Inc.,
http://www.oblong.com/g-speak/ (2005).

[6]

Xiao, R., Harrison, C., and Hudson, S.E. WorldKit:
rapid and easy creation of ad-hoc interactive
applications on everyday surfaces. ACM
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (2013). pp. 879888.

Discussion
For accuracy, either feedback (visual or tactile) is
effective for finding target site. For speed, the visual
feedback does not effective for quick searching. The
error bar for visual feedback is higher than other two
conditions, suggesting a larger overshoot effect.
However, tactile feedback reduced the task time by
12.3 % compared to that of the test with no feedback.
Our experiments show that tactile and visual feedbacks
are efficient for the half-implant system. Tactile
feedback is particularly suitable for quick input.

Conclusion

Figure 7. Results of the speed. The average
speed differs only slightly over the
conditions, whereas the variance differs a
great deal.

The primary benefit of this device is that the user can
feel hand gesture feedback, anytime and anywhere.
The device can be placed on the users’ fingernail for
approximately three weeks. Next research interest
would include surveying social acceptability of this
concept. For example: 1. What size and weight is
acceptable for half-implant. 2. How long do users want
to attach this device. 3. How the user’s feeling changes
over time.

In this abstract, we proposed a half-implant device
located on the fingernail. Preliminary user study
suggested that tactile feedback is effective for quick
input. As a future work, we are going to build
applications over this result.

1451

Work-in-Progress

CHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada

[7]

Iwamoto, T., Tatezono, M., and Shinoda, H. NonContact Method for Producing Tactile Sensation
Using Airborne Ultrasound. Proc. EuroHaptics 2008,
LNCS 5024(2008). pp. 504-513.

[8]

Carter, T., Seah, S.A., Long, B., Drinkwater, B.,
and Subramanian, S. UltraHaptics: Multi-Point MidAir Haptic Feedback for Touch Surfaces.
Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology (2013).
pp.505-515.

[9]

Google Glass, Project Glass. Google.Inc.,
http://www.google.com/glass/start/ (2012).

[10] AiRScouter. Brother Industries, Ltd.,
http://www.brother.co.jp/product/hmd/wd100ga/in
dex.htm (2008).
[11] Mistry, P., Maes, P., and Chang, L. WUW - Wear Ur
World - A Wearable Gestural Interface. ACM In the
CHI '09 extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems, No. 6(2009). pp.4111-4116.
[12] Tamaki, E., Miyaki, T., and Rekimoto, J.
BrainyHand: a wearable computing device without
HMD and it's interaction techniques. Proceedings of
the International Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces. No. 2(2010), pp. 387-388.
[13] Bluetooth Wireless headphone BackBeat 903+.
Plantronics, Inc.,
http://www.plantronics.com/us/product/backbeat903-plus (2010).
[14] Sato, K., Minamizawa, K., Kawakami, N. and Tachi,
S. MasterSlave in “Haptic Telexistance”. ACM
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, SIGGRAPH2007
Emerging Technologies(2007).

[15] Fernando, C.L., Furukawa, M., Kurogi, T., Hirota,
K., Kamuro, S., Sato, K., Minamizawa, K., and
Tachi, S. TELESAR V: TELExistence surrogate
anthropomorphic robot. ACM Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, SIGGRAPH2012 Emerging
Technologies(2012). pp. 23:1.
[16] Tamaki, E., Miyaki, T., and Rekimoto, J.
PossessedHand: techniques for controlling human
hands using electrical muscles stimuli. Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. No. 10(2011), pp.543-552.
[17] Tsukada, K. and Yasumura, M. Ubi-Finger: a Simple
Gesture Input Device for Mobile and Ubiquitous
Environment. Journal of Asian Information, Science
and Life(AISL). Vol. 2, No. 2, Nova Science Inc.
(2004). pp. 111-120.
[18] Holz, C., Grossman, T., Fitzmaurice, G. and Agur,
A., Implanted user interfaces. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI '12).
[19] Ando, M., and Inami, M. SmartFinger: "NailMounted Tactile Display. Emerging Technologies
SIGGRAPH (2002).
[20] Ando, H., Kusachi, E. and Watanabe, J. Nailmounted tactile display for boundary/texture
augmentation. ACM Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advances in Computer
Entertainment Technology(2007). pp. 292-293.
[21] Weiss, M., Wacharamanotham, C., Voelker, S., and
Borchers, J. FingerFlux: near-surface haptic
feedback on tabletops. In Proceedings of the 24th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology(2011). pp.615-620.

1452

