lapillus bug: Creature-like Behaving Particles
Based on Interactive Mid-Air Acoustic Manipulation
Michinari Kono
Keio University
5322, Endo, Fujisawa
mkono@sfc.keio.ac.jp

Takayuki Hoshi
Nagoya Institute of Technology
Gokiso-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya
star@nitech.ac.jp

ABSTRACT

Modern technology development has made the border
between life and matter more ambiguous. Studies that find
creature-like behavior from inorganic materials are carried
out in the field of art and entertainment. On the other hand,
it is an important issue to manipulate objects without
implanting any actuators directly inside.
In this research, we aim to extract and express creature-like
behavior from inanimate objects by usage of external force.
By generating a standing wave with focused ultrasound, a
phenomenon known as acoustic levitation enables a
physical particle to float in mid-air. The particle is trapped
in the ultrasonic focal point and follows its position. We
have developed a system so that users can interact with the
floating particle that looks and behaves as though it is a
small hovering bug. We have received many reactions and
opinions from attendees at exhibitions. In this paper, we
describe the system overview, concept, design,
implementation, and feedback from the exhibitions.
Author Keywords

Focused Ultrasound; Phased Array; Acoustic Levitation;
Interaction; Actuation; Creature-like Expressions
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION

When considering the interaction between computers and
humans, the limitation of screens has always existed. A
common interaction method is to use interfaces outside the
screen, to manipulate information inside the screen;
however, there are an increasing number of approaches that
aim to remove this limitation [1, 2]. Generally, information
inside screens tends to be dynamic, but objects existing in

Yasuaki Kakehi
Keio University
5322, Endo, Fujisawa
ykakehi@sfc.keio.ac.jp

the real world are static. Approaches such as projection
mapping, that enables inanimate matter to appear as though
it is dynamic, are now popular. On the other hand, it is an
important issue to provide information and feedback
directly to users regarding the manipulation of objects [3, 4].
When we consider manipulating objects, there are two
types of general approaches. One approach is to implant
mechanical actuators directly into the object (direct
actuation). In this method, it may be easy to manipulate and
control the object, but we sometimes find it difficult to
implant the actuators because of their size and shape. There
are also limitations in moving the objects, due to physical
connections, wires, and substrates. Another approach is to
use external forces to affect the object (indirect actuation).
In this approach, actuators are not implanted in the object
itself; therefore, the object retains its original features. This
approach enables us to manipulate simple objects that do
not have any complex components.
Using the indirect actuation process, the author previously
created a system that manipulates objects by utilizing the
features with interaction [5]. However, the object remained
stuck on the ground because of the unavoidable force,
gravity. In this paper, we propose a method of manipulating
objects in mid-air by indirect actuation. Additionally, we
aim to develop methods for interaction with the levitated
objects.
Specifically, we used an ultrasonic phased array and a
phenomenon known as acoustic levitation to manipulate the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ACE '14, November 11 - 14 2014, Funchal, Portugal
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2945-3/14/11…$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2663806.2663850

Figure 1. lapillus bug

particle in mid-air. We have focused on a unique feature
that the particle trembles in mid-air and exhibits creaturelike behavior, similar to a fruit fly. In the following sections,
we describe the technology and implementation of our
system, and an interactive installation named “lapillus bug”
(Figure 1), which has a particle flying about, behaving like
a type of bug, and interacting with humans.
RELATED WORK
Actuating Objects

There are studies that make it possible to move objects
without implanting actuators directly inside them. Actuated
Workbench [6] and Madgets [7] are typical examples of
this approach. They use an array of electromagnets to move
the object on a flat surface. ZeroN [8] uses magnetic
levitation to manipulate a single object in mid-air. By
placing objects in mid-air, resistance such as friction, which
occurs for objects set on a surface, does not occur. These
studies use specially modified objects that have magnets
implanted, and do not make use of the intrinsic material
properties.
Ultra-Tangibles [9] is a system that enables contactless
manipulation of objects using ultrasound. This approach
does not require any special manufacturing for the object.
However, the workspace is limited by the surrounding
ultrasonic devices and object manipulation is limited to two
dimensions.
Acoustic Levitation

There is another method for manipulating objects in mid-air
that uses a phenomenon known as acoustic levitation.
Acoustic levitation is a procedure by which objects are
trapped in the nodes of standing waves produced by
ultrasound (Figure 2). Researchers have accomplished
levitation and manipulation of particles [10, 11]. Kozuka et
al. [11] placed two ultrasonic transducers 18 mm to 26 mm
away from each other. The sound waves interfered with
each other, and by controlling the phase difference, the
levitated object was manipulated in one dimension,

vertically. Foresti et al. [12] described a method for
manipulating levitated particles horizontally by transferring
them over multiple piezoelectric transducers. Xie et al. [13]
demonstrated a method for levitating small animals. Using
a single transducer and a reflector, living animals, such as
ladybirds, were levitated in the nodes of the standing wave.
The procedures mentioned above are all achieved in small
areas, where a human would have difficulty inserting hands
and interacting with the levitated objects.
In this research, we use travelling waves produced from
ultrasonic transducers and reflected waves to generate
standing waves to levitate objects (Figure 2). A portable
ultrasonic phased array system is used, in which ultrasonic
transducers are arranged. This device was originally
developed to provide non-contact tactile sensations or
interactions [14]. Focusing ultrasound carries strong
ultrasound in the distance and thus enables the levitation of
objects in a large area where humans can interact intuitively.
Ochiai et al. [15] also uses focused ultrasound. Four
ultrasound devices, which are surrounding the workspace,
manipulate particles three-dimensionally. In our system, the
ultrasound device is hung from the ceiling, facing
downwards; therefore, users can gain access from all sides.
Moreover, the system does not require multiple ultrasound
devices arranged face-to-face, but uses reflection from the
floor. Therefore, we can use this system in everyday
situations, such as tabletops with reflections from the table
or plates.
Inorganic Matter and Creature Imitation

In this research, we attempt to create an installation that
focuses on the “creature-like” behavior that occurs when
objects undergo indirect actuation. The relationship
between life and matter is believed to be very close [16].
Studies that found and expressed creature-like behavior
from inorganic materials were carried out in the field of art
and entertainment. For example, “New creatures” [17] is a
video in which stop-motion animation is used to apply
creature-like movements to inanimate objects from our
daily lives. Studies attempting to demonstrate such behavior
in the real world have been also carried out. Meter Crawler
[18] is a robotic snail with implanted motors. Species Series
[19] is a robot that was made by implanting actuators inside
garbage. However, this present study uses real world
materials without implanting or attaching anything.
We previously developed “tamable looper” [5]; a cluster of
magnets that moves like a creature and humans can interact
with and tame the “creature”. However, this present
research utilizes more common materials. The objects do
not remain attached to surfaces and expressions are created
in mid-air.
SYSTEM DESIGN OF THE LAPILLUS BUG

Figure 2. Basic Principle of Acoustic Levitation

The technology is based on an ultrasonic phased array. This
device was originally designed for contactless haptic
interaction, stimulated by acoustic radiation pressure at the

focal point of the ultrasound array [14]. This ultrasonic
phased array can be focused to a single point, by applying
appropriate phase delays to the transducers. The particle
follows the focal point, since it is trapped inside the
standing wave. Therefore, controlling the position of the
focal point enables the levitated object to move horizontally.
We utilize the principle mentioned above to levitate and
manipulate an object in a three-dimensional real space,
without any modification to the original material.
Furthermore, users can freely manipulate and interact with
this floating particle. We associated this small particle with
a kind of bug to accomplish the interaction between humans
and a “creature”.
Hardware Design

Figure 3 presents the system overview of the lapillus bug.
In this system, we hang the ultrasonic phased array device
facing downwards, using the surface of the table, or any
other solid flat object, as a reflection plate, placed at a
distance of 200 to 300 mm.
We levitate the particles by placing them inside the nodes
of the standing waves produced by the focused ultrasound.
The focal point of the ultrasound is movable, which enables
the particle to move two-dimensionally and to exhibit
creature-like features. The levitation is started by using
fingers or tools, such as tweezers, and placing the particle at
a given height. When the particle is released, it is absorbed
into the nearest node of the standing wave.
The size of ultrasonic phased array device is: 250 mm (W)
× 250 mm (D) × 60 mm (H), with 285 ultrasound
transducers arranged in a rectangular area. The array
produces ultrasound with a frequency of 40 kHz, and an 8.5
mm wavelength. Therefore, the nodes of the standing waves,
where particles can levitate, are produced at 4.25 mm
intervals.
We also installed a camera, for image processing to enable
interaction, and four small DC fans for device cooling and
temperature stability.

Software Design

The software is based on openframeworks, a framework for
C++. The refresh rate of the device is 1 kHz, so we
developed the program to run faster than 1000 fps, for
maximum performance. However, the frame rate of the
image processing is limited by the camera to 30 fps.
Therefore, the manipulation of ultrasound and image
processing are carried out in separate threads.
The manipulation of the ultrasound focus is based on an
algorithm that calculates the appropriate phase differences
for the ultrasound output. The levitated particle is trapped
and fixed over the focal point and follows the position of
that point. The resolution of that position is approximately
0.27 mm, which can be updated every millisecond.
Image processing is used to recognize the users’
manipulations. We will describe the details of the
interaction in the installation section. The camera captures
images of objects or the light spots from laser pointers that
are used for users’ inputs. For example, when we use a red
laser pointer for input manipulation, we recognize the color,
brightness, and the size of the feature, to distinguish the
laser spots from the levitated particle. The threshold for
discrimination depends on the environment, such as lighting
and distance from the surface to the device. Therefore, we
first determine the location of the camera with respect to the
ultrasound position and calibrate the threshold with the
color information obtained under the operating environment.
TECHNICAL EVALUATION

We have experimented with some elements of our system
to evaluate its stability and possibilities. In the following
experiments, we located the device 200 mm above the
surface, the focal distance was set to 220 mm, we used a 2
mm particle, levitated the particle at a height of
approximately 20 mm, and moved the particle at 250 mm/s.
Specifically, we examined the appearance of the particle
depending on speed, number of particles, generation power,
and number of transducers. We examined the stability by
recording the average number of times the particle moved
back and forth. Details of these movements will be
mentioned in the following sections.
The distance between the system and the reflecting surface
is adjustable, but it is thought that a larger distance will
make the particle unstable, due to the attenuation of the
ultrasound with the propagation distances and the diameter
of the focal point. According to Hoshi et al. [20], the
attenuation of ultrasound travelling through air is small
enough to ignore. However, influence of the distance on the
diameter of the focal point, w, can be described as Equation
(1) [14].
(1)
Here, λ [m] is the wavelength of the ultrasound, R [m] is the
focal distance, and D [m] is the length of the side of the

Figure 3. Overview of System

square array. We can tell from the equation that w is
proportional to R, therefore, when the distance to the device
and the reflection surface becomes larger, w increases as
well. The energy density at the focal point decreases when
this occurs, thus, using this system at a large distance
produces instability. Additionally, it was determined
experimentally that adjusting the focal distance to 20 mm
longer than the distance between the ultrasound system and
the reflection surface, resulted in more stable levitation.
The antinode of the standing wave is located on the
reflecting surface, as the surface is considered to be a free
edge against the acoustic pressure. The wavelength of the
ultrasound is 8.5 mm; therefore, the closest node to the
surface is at a height of 2.125 mm. In the following
measurements, we decided to use the fifth node from the
bottom (i.e., at a height of 19.125 mm) to levitate a particle
(Figure 4). There is a small difference between the
measured height and that prediction from theory. This error
may occur because of the differences between the incident
wave and the reflection waves.
Moreover, we operated the device for more than 30 minutes
before the measurements, since the performance of the
device may be affected by its temperature. Additionally, the
results may differ depending on the shape of the particle.
Therefore, we have to treat the particle with care during
experiments.

faster than 350 mm/s, it was difficult even to levitate the
particle. Furthermore, when we moved the particle faster
than 300 mm/s, the particle deformation, due to pinching,
appeared to increase. Therefore, we recommend using this
system at speeds lower than 300 mm/s.

Figure 5. Speed and Stability
Particle Size and Material

In this system, there is a wider range of materials available
than for approaches using magnetic actuators. We used 1
mm, 2 mm, and 3 mm diameter polystyrene particles and
carried out measurements under the same conditions as
discussed in the “Particle Speed” section. However, we did
not observe any noticeable difference.
Materials such as sand grains, cotton, and water drops were
also levitated. In addition, objects that have specific shapes,
e.g., capacitors and microchips, were also levitated.
As mentioned earlier in the technical evaluation section,
shapes of objects affect the stability of levitation. The
movement and stability is also affected by parameters such
as size, mass and so on. A detailed examination of these
effects will be carried out in the future.
Multiple
Particles
Simultaneously

Figure 4. Particles Levitating in the Nodes
Particle Speed

We examined the stability depending on the particle’s speed
by using the parameters described above.
We counted how many times the particle can move backand-forth in an area 60 mm wide, by changing the speed
with 10 mm/s steps. The maximum number of counts was
set to 100, and if the particle fell during the back and forth
movement, we reduced the count.
Figure 5 describes the average number of the back-andforth movements, which we measured five times for each
speed. As a result, the particle was stable at speeds up to
310 mm/s, but became unstable at higher speeds. At speeds

Levitated

and

Manipulated

Not only one but multiple particles can be levitated,
simultaneously, with individual manipulation. Since the
ultrasonic phased array only produces a single focal point at
a time, we need to rapidly switch the focal point between
two locations. We attempted to levitate three particles,
simultaneously, by switching three focal points at 333 Hz.
This was possible but difficult to obtain sufficient stability.
However, two particles were successfully levitated by
switching two focal points at 500 Hz (Figure 6).
According to the theory of acoustic levitation, particles are
trapped in the nodes and multiple nodes exist in the
standing wave. Therefore, multiple particles can levitate
vertically along the standing wave. We attempted to put
particles in the nodes, sequentially from the bottom. As a
result, Figure 7 shows that 26 particles were levitated.
However, the stability of the particles levitating at the high

positions was low. The upper part of the line of particles
had a warp. If the number of particles were limited to
twelve from the bottom, the objects were successfully
moved at up to 100 mm/s. In this way, we can see that
multiple particles are able to be manipulated, with a tradeoff between the number of particles and stability.

Figure 6. Individual Manipulation of Plural Particles

Angle between the System and Reflection Surface

The ultrasonic phased array is set parallel to the reflection
surface. In order to consider the influence of tilts, possibly
occur during setting up the system and to consider further
applications, we examined the maximum tilt angle, θ,
where the origin is at the center of the lower part of the
device (Figure 8). The tilt angle was increased with 1° steps.
When we moved the particle along the x-axis, θ was
measured to be 9° and 6°, when the particle was moved
along the z-axis.

Figure 8. Angle between the System and Surface
Vibration of Particle

In the first section, we mentioned the unique behavior: the
particle trembling slightly in mid-air. Particles are trapped
as they are attracted to the lower level (trough) of the
acoustic potential field [21]. When this occurs, the particle
does not remain at the bottom of the trough. The restoring
force towards the bottom of the potential field produces
simple harmonic motion. This motion is considered to be
the cause of the trembling phenomenon. However, the
trembling movement changes, depending on environmental
conditions and particle shapes. Therefore, controlling them
intentionally would be difficult.
Figure 7. Particles Levitating Over a Single Focal Point
Number of Transducers

There are 285 ultrasonic transducers, arranged in a 17 × 17
array (four transducers were removed from the corners).
We can select the number of active transducers: 285, 225,
169, 121, 81, 49, 25, or 9. If the particles can be levitated
with fewer transducers, we can consider making the device
smaller or manipulating more particles by dividing the array.
Therefore, we examined how the particles behave when
levitated by fewer transducers (Table 1). The table shows
that the system is sufficiently stable with 225 transducers.
Using the system with fewer transducers is difficult and it is
difficult to even levitate a particle with 49 or less
transducers. Therefore, it is not plausible to reduce the size
of the current prototype system or divide the array.

Table 1. Number of Transducers and Stability

Besides, it was possible to reduce the size of the trembling
motion by decreasing the intensity of the ultrasound. In this
system, the intensity could be adjusted by PWM controls
[20], represented by integral numbers from 0 to 623. With a
24 V supply, the maximum output had an acoustic pressure
of 16 mN. We carried out measurements under the same
conditions as discussed in the section, “Particle Speed” and
changed the output force with 10% steps, to determine how
the particle behaves with varying output intensity (Figure 9).
The output force is not proportional to the output intensity,
p, but sin2(πp/1248). As a result, if the output force was
larger than 50% of the maximum, no disturbance was
observed. However, the particle was unstable and easily
dropped with 30% to 40% of the maximum output. It was
possible to levitate a particle with 10% to 20% of the
maximum output, but it was not possible to move it stably.
Decreasing the output intensity will reduce the vibration of
the particle; however, it also reduces the stability of the
levitation. Therefore, we can conclude there is a trade-off
between the stability and the magnitude of the vibration
caused by the output intensity. The vibration of the particle

that occurred in our system could be controlled from 50%
to 100% of the maximum output force.

Figure 10. Interaction Using Tabletop Objects

Figure 9. Output Force and Stability
INSTALLATION OF LEVITATING PARTICLES

In this system, we levitate objects and present creature-like
features to develop applications in the fields of art and
entertainment.
Overview of the Installation

A levitated particle that trembles rapidly may exhibit
creature-like behavior, similar to a fruit fly. Therefore, we
developed an installation where users observe and interact
with an artificial “bug,” i.e., an inorganic piece of material
behaving as if it is alive. They may also experience an
unusual event: taming a wild creature that is generally
untamable.
In this installation, a fruit-fly-like black particle floats
above a plate with leftovers from breakfast. When there is
no input from the user, the particle floats about irregularly.
The movement is designed to move in arcs and freely.
While it’s moving, the speed of the bug changes time to
time with acceleration. We designed the speed and
acceleration to change under the range based on the particle
speed section. The computer-generated behavior may be
more examined by referencing principles such as ``12 basic
principles of animation’’ [22]. However, when an input is
provided, the particle moves as intended.
We have prepared two kinds of methods for the users to
interact with the particle. One is to move a red tomato
placed on the plate (Figure 10) and the other is to project a
light spot on the plate with a laser pointer (Figure 11). We
developed the interaction method by referencing the instinct
of fruit flies that they are attracted and gather to fruits and
lightings.
The interaction is implemented by using a web camera
placed next to the ultrasonic phased array. By recognizing
the size of the red object (a tomato) with the web camera,
we enable the particle to float around the tomato. We
directed the particle not to stay near the tomato all the time,

Figure 11. Interaction by a Laser Pointer

but to float about randomly and then return to the tomato.
With this interactivity, users can take part in the ecology of
the “bug”.
Moreover, we make use of the color and brightness
information from the image acquired by the web camera.
When using a laser pointer, the particle can be directed to
continuously follow the laser spot. The focal point holding
the particle is moved towards the position illuminated by
the laser pointer. The users can play with the “bug” in real
time.
Exhibitions and Discussions

Up to now, the authors have demonstrated the system
through exhibitions, e.g. ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2013 Art
Gallery (20-23 November, 2013) and the exhibition of the
award winning works of The Japan Media Arts Festival (516 February, 2014, Figure 12). At these exhibitions, we
placed breads, tomatoes and leafy vegetables on a plate.
The levitated 2 mm sized black polystyrene particle flies
about interacting with laser pointers. We designed the stage
with leftovers to enhance the context. A black polystyrene
grain is used in order to maintain the stability as mentioned
in the technical evaluation section, and to enable attendees
to realize it as a flying fruit fly.
In these exhibitions, we explained the abstract of the
installation with demonstrations and asked the attendees

one but multiple particles, pieces of bread, or the skin of the
tomato. It is significant that attendees found it an interesting
experience levitating objects with their hands and making
inorganic matters come alive.
In this installation, we decorated the space with leftovers.
At the meantime, it may be difficult to discuss the creaturelike behaviors separately, which results from the decoration
and from the acoustic levitation. Therefore, we plan to
develop different types of our installation to discuss the
effect.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Figure 12. Exhibition of lapillus bug

whether they perceived more features than the inorganic
polystyrene grain originally possessed. Comments generally
mentioned to real creatures as follows: “It looks as if it’s
alive.”; “I thought that there was a real fly.”; and “There’s
something flying.” Furthermore, comments specifically
mentioned the trembling: “The way how it trembles is
nice.” and “The vibration is interesting.” It was significant
that the trembling behavior, which we have focused on in
this study, led to this creature-like behavior and gathered
the interest of people.
The attendees gathered around the work and some of them
observed the bug closely and from different angles. This
seemed to be occurred since we used a plate as a reflection
surface, and so that there weren’t anything disturbing the
access. Some attendees noticed the device but some thought
that the implementation was included in the plate or in the
table. Additionally, some attendees thought that the particle
was created by projection. We can consider that the simple
device composition did not disturb the direction of the work
by not making the existence and the relationship of the
device clearly noticeable.
Attendees who experienced the interaction tried to lead the
bug towards the leftovers scattered about or moved the laser
pointer back and forth rapidly and enjoyed the creature-like
behavior. They mentioned: “It’s trying hard to follow the
light.” and “It’s cute.”; when they saw the delay in the
particle following the laser pointer.
However, many attendees were interested in the principle of
levitation. Comments such as “Seeing things levitated is
just so interesting.” were provided. The attendees were also
fascinated by the situation in which matter was freed from
gravity and was levitated in the real world.
When there was no explanation to the attendee, some of
them did not realize the way to interact with the particle and
dropped the particle with their hands. This means that we
have room to reconsider the interaction method. Moreover,
the attendees did not just want to interact by using laser
pointers, but they wanted to insert particles into the acoustic
standing wave by themselves. In fact, they inserted not only

In this work, a particle was levitated by acoustic levitation.
The particle could be moved and interacted with in mid-air.
We used an ultrasonic phased array for manipulating the
particle and a camera for recognizing the users’ inputs. The
creature-like behavior of the particle when it was levitated
and moved was also observed.
Furthermore, we designed an installation named “lapillus
bug”, in which a user can interact with a “bug”, and tame it
paying attention to the creature-like features that the
levitated particle exhibits. In fact, many attendees at the
exhibitions perceived and enjoyed creature-like features
associated with the levitated particle.
Our future plan includes the following topics. We will carry
out further examination of the limitations and possibilities
related to particle size, shape, material, and numbers. It is
predicted that we will be able to levitate heavier materials
by enhancing the output of the ultrasound. If so, we may
levitate objects that have more detailed shapes, such as
small puppets, which could be used to create animated
stories. Not only one but multiple particles were levitated
and we have discussed the possibilities in this paper. We
plan to develop further applications utilizing this property.
At present, we only levitate solid matter but using other
types of materials, such as liquids, may lead to new spatial
expressions.
In the system we have developed, the particle remains at a
constant height. We will consider enabling vertical
manipulation
for
three-dimensional
movement.
Additionally, tweezers were used for the initial placement
of the particle, but we are now developing a system that
starts the levitation by adjusting the focal point for a
particle located on the floor or a stand. Through the
exhibitions, the attendees performed interactions that we
did not intend. This means that there is a room for
improvement in the current interaction scenario. We will
consider gestures or tangible inputs to interact with the
particle.
Proposals for practical applications are also an important
issue. For example, there may be applications in fields
where contactless manipulation is required, such as
handling small electronic parts for micro-machine
technologies.

We will refine the worldview of the artwork “lapillus bug”
and attempt to make the border between life and matter
more ambiguous.
REFERENCES

11. Kozuka, T., Yasui, K., Tuziuti, T., Towata, A., Iida, Y.:
``Noncontact Acoustic Manipulation in Air,’’ Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics, Vol.46, No.7B, pp.49484950, 2007.

1. Ishii, H., Lakatos, D., Bonanni, L., Labrune, J.:
``Radical Atoms: Beyond Tangible Bits, Toward
Transformable Materials,’’ ACM interactions 2012, Vol.
XIX.1, January + February 2012, pp. 37- 51, 2012.

12. Foresti, D., Nabavi, M., Klingauf, M., Ferrari, A.,
Poulikkakos, D.,``Acoutophoretic contactless transport
and handling of matter in air,’’ PNAS 2013, vol.110
no.31, 12549-12554，2013．

2. Vertegaal, R., Poupyrev, I.: ``Organic User Interfaces,’’
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 51, No. 6, pp. 26-30,
2008.

13. Xie, W., Cao, C., Lu, Y., Hong, Z., Wei, B.: ``Acoustic
method for levitation of small living animals,’’ Applied
Physics Letters 89, 214102, 2006.

3. Poupyrev, I., Nashida, T., Okabe, M.: ``Actuation and
Tangible User Interfaces: the Vaucanson Duck, Robots,
and Shape Displays,’’ ACM TEI 2007, pp.205-212,
2007.

14. Hoshi, T.: ``Compact Ultrasound Device for Noncontact
Interaction,’’ ACM ACE 2012, pp.502-505, 2012.

4. Ishii, H.: ``The Tangible User Interface and its
Evolution,’’ Communications of the ACM, Vol. 51, No.
6, pp. 32-36, 2008.
5. Kono, M., Kakehi, Y.: ``tamable looper: creature-like
expressions and interactions by movement and
deformation of clusters of sphere magnets,’’ ACM
SIGGRAPH 2012 Posters, No. 25, 2012.
6. Pangaro, G., Maynes-Aminzade, D., Ishii, H.: ``The
Actuated Workbench: Computer-Controlled Actuation
in Tabletop Tangible Interfaces,’’ ACM UIST 2002,
pp.181-190, 2002.
7. Weiss, M., Schwarz, F., Jakubowski, S., Borchers, J.:
``Madgets: Actuating widgets on interactive tabletops,’’
ACM UIST 2010, pp. 293–302, 2010.
8. Lee, J., Post, R., Ishii, H.: ``ZeroN: Mid-Air Tangible
Interaction Enabled by Computer Controlled Magnetic
Levitation,’’ ACM UIST 2011, pp.327-336, 2011.
9. Marshall, M., Carter, T., Alexander, J., Subramanian, S.:
``Ultra-Tangibles: Creating Movable Tangible Object on
Intreactive Tables,’’ ACM CHI 2012, pp.2185-2188,
2012.
10. Kozuka, T., Yasui, K., Tuziuti, T., Towata, A., Iida, Y.:
``Acoustic Standing-Wave Field for Manipulation in
Air,’’ Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, Vol.47,
No.5, pp.4336-4338, 2008.

15.Ochiai, Y., Hoshi, T., Rekimoto, J.: ``Three-dimensional
Mid-air Acoustic Manipulation by Ultrasonic Phased
Arrays,’’ arXiv, 1312.4006, 2013.
16. Hesse, M., B.: “Forces and Fields,” Philosophical
Library, pp.35-38, 1962.
17. Euphrates: `` New creatures (living in your house) | Jury
Selections | Entertainment Division | 2012 [16th] | Japan
Media Arts Festival Archive,’’ http://archive.jmediaarts.jp/en/festival/2012/entertainment/works/16ej1
_New_creatures/
18. Takahashi, K.: ``Meter Crawler- Ars Electronica
Center,’’ http://www.aec.at/center/en/2013/09/06/metercrawler/
19. Yang, W.: ``Species series,’’ ACM SIGGRAPH Asia
2012 Art Gallery, No. 13, 2012.
20. Hoshi, T., Takahashi, M., Iwamoto, T., Shinoda, H.:
``Noncontact Tactile Display Based on Radiation
Pressure of Airborne Ultrasound,’’ IEEE Transactions
on Haptics, Vol.3, No.3, pp. 155-165, 2010.
21. M. Barmatz, M., Collas, P.: ``Acoustic radiation
potential on a sphere in plane, cylindrical, and spherical
standing wave fields’’, The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, Vol.77, pp.928-945, 1985.
22. Johnston, O., Thomas, F.: ``The Illusion of Life: Disney
Animation,'' Hyperion, pp.47-69, 1981.

