MoveMe: 3D Haptic Support for a Musical Instrument
Katsuya Fujii
Sophia S Russo
MIT Media Lab
MIT
The University of Tokyo Cambridge, USA
Tokyo, Japan
ssrusso@mit.edu
katauyaf@media.mit.edu

Pattie Maes
Jun Rekimoto
MIT Media Lab
The University of Tokyo
Cambridge, USA
Tokyo, Japan
pattie@media.mit.edu
rekimoto@acm.org

Figure 1 (a) Theremin (b) The system connects an expert and a beginner via two haptic robots.
(c) An expert can pre-record his/her movements so that a beginner can play it back later as necessary.
ABSTRACT

INTRODUCTION

Fine motor skills like finger/hand manipulations are
essential for playing musical instruments and these skills
require a great amount of time and effort to acquire.
Researchers have been introducing haptic feedback
systems in order to facilitate the process of learning motor
skills but little research has expanded the possibility of
applying to the field of musical instruments. Hence, we
developed a system called “MoveMe” that provides threedimensional haptic support for playing a musical
instrument. The system guides a user’s hands as if
someone else was holding their hands to help a beginner
play a musical instrument. With the system, an expert can
pre-record his/her movements so that a beginner can play
it back later as necessary. Alternatively, the system
connects an expert and a beginner via two haptic robots
and the expert can, in real time, guide and correct the
beginner’s movement. In addition to those functionalities,
we introduce a new proficiency metric provided by force
feedback. A master can evaluate how much a beginner
has improved using both audio feedback as well as this
new force-based metric. Through the experiments that we
conducted, we found that our system is effective in terms
of playing a song at a correct speed and rhythm.

Playing musical instruments utilizes kinesthetic learning
skills that require a great amount of time and effort to
acquire. Kinesthetic haptic interfaces are haptic interfaces
that exert controlled forces on the human body to train
motor skills, and they have proved to be efficient in
teaching skills in such fields as surgery, assembly or
rehabilitation [1]. Generally, the motor skills controlled
by this type of system are finger- or hand-manipulation.
Several research projects have been conducted with these
movements in mind, not only for musical instruments, but
also for artistic disciplines such as drawing or sculpting
[5][6].

AUTHOR KEYWORDS

Haptic, hand manipulation, music, learning, remote
teaching
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from Permissions@acm.org. ACE '15, November 16-19, 2015, Iskandar,
Malaysia
© 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3852-3/15/11 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2832932.2832947

In the field of musical instruments, vibration feedback or
electrical stimuli to the muscles around the forearm is
commonly utilized for manipulating finger movements
programmatically [2][3]. Those systems allow users to
play melodies with no previous experience in playing a
musical instrument. Like the research above, most of the
research has been focusing on finger-manipulation,
despite the fact that hand manipulation is as important as
finger manipulation in playing musical instruments.
Musical instruments have several factors that make it
uniquely inappropriate for currently existing projects to
be applied to them. For example, playing musical
instruments requires continuous movements, unlike object
manipulations that can be executed in step-by-step
processes. Performing a song relies on playing sets of
shifting notes, and the way you shift from one note to
another can dramatically change the atmosphere of the
song. Additionally, the output from musical instruments is
audial, which means timing, rhythm and other real-time
properties should be taken into account.

Talkegwa et al took a similar approach [4][19]. Xiao
developed MirroFugure [8], a system that shows video of
full-scaled physical hands shown in situ at the keyboard
and Andante [9], a representation of music as animated
characters walking along the piano keyboard appearing to
play the physical keys with each step. Some systems are
even commercially available [10]. Haptic detents provide
the augmented interface for the theremin so that the
musician can feel the locations of equal tempered pitch,
which provide improved accuracy in pitch selection [11].
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
Figure 2 System Configuration for MoveMe
(a. Top view, b. Front view)

In this paper, we propose a 3D hand manipulation system
called “MoveMe” focusing specifically on the use of hand
manipulation in playing a musical instrument. (Figure
1,2) With the system, an expert can pre-record his
movements so that beginners can play it back later as
necessary. Additionally, the system connects an expert
and a beginner via two haptic robots and the expert can, in
real time, guide and correct the beginner’s movements.
We then introduce a new proficiency metric provided by
force feedback. A master can evaluate how much a
beginner has improved using both audio feedback as well
as this new force-based metric.
RELATED WORK

Here are some several projects that focus on hand
manipulation. Also, we look into supporting systems for a
musical instrument.
Hand Manipulation

Providing a physical force is not the only way to support
hand manipulations. For decades, augmented reality has
been used to provide rich visual contents that support
some tasks, including hand manipulations [12]. While not
visual, haptic feedback is often used for hand
manipulation by stimulating different nerves and
receptors in the user’s skin, including free and sensory
hair nerves as well as receptors for cold, heat, touch,
pressure, and pain [13][14]. Researchers compared those
haptic feedback approaches in order to find out the
efficiency of each [15][16] Recent projects include
SPIDAR-8, which is a system for implementing direct,
two-handed, multi-finger manipulations in a virtual world
[7]. Affordance++ stimulates the user’s arm with
electricity and allows objects not only to allow the user
actuate them but also perform required movements [17].
Support System for Musical Instruments

Several projects have been conducted in order to enhance
instrument learning, in which visual representations are a
common approach. One recent project is P.I.A.N.O, an
interactive projected augmentation system in which users
can see block graphics colored to represent fingering.

Our system aims to explore the possibility of a haptic
support system for playing a musical instrument,
specifically focusing on hand manipulation. In order to
implement the first proof-of-concept prototype, we chose
the theremin, a musical instrument that a musician plays
by moving his hands in the air to manipulate an
electromagnetic field. Thus, correct hand manipulations
are critical in order to make a proper sound. Additionally,
as theremins work by producing an electromagnetic field
that could get disrupted by the proximity of additional
people, a teacher cannot get close to a theremin when
teaching a beginner. A haptic device can be utilized in
this case, as it minimizes interference with the
electromagnetic field. As for haptic feedback, we adopted
a physical force feedback that mechanically moves the
user’s hands rather than vibro-tactile feedback or
electrical muscle stimulation that might be too vague in
terms of providing support for hand manipulation.
Theremin

The theremin is an electrical music instrument which
creates a unique sound by detecting user's hand position.
It contains two metal antennas, the distance from one
antenna determines the pitch and the distance from other
the controls volume.
Theremins emit electromagnetic fields around two
antennae and sense the proximity of the user's hand.
Inexperienced players often produce earsplitting blats and
squawks as they don't have any visual cues, such as those
they would get from pianos or guitars. More specifically,
pianos and guitars have keys and frets, respectively, that
provide haptic sensation and each position on the
instrument has designated sound. Novices can practice by
visually confirming their finger position which helps
drive them to perform the correct movements. This is not
the case for the theremin as there is no physical contact
with the instrument.
A great player must possess a good ear, fine muscle
control and ample coordination. Also, as a theremin is
affected by ambient temperature or capacitive
environments which cause the electronics inside to
change, it is hard to achieve the same tuning unless you
re-adjust the pitch correction every time you play.

Figure 3 (a) User’s hand can be easily attached to the device.
(b) Pre-recording a master’s movement.
Phantom Haptic

We used a Phantom haptic interface by SensAble
Technologies [18]. The device includes a robot arm with a
stylus pen connected to its end. The device measures hand
movement caused by pivoting at wrist by providing the
position of the stylus in x, y, and z coordinates. It is
capable of measuring the stylus position with a resolution
of less than 0.005mm at a speed of 1kHz. The workspace
is 60 width x 120 height x 70 depth mm. A user of this
system wears gloves attached to the stylus pen of the
Phantom Device and the stylus pen can be easily attached
to the device. (Figure 3). We aimed to design this in such
a way that users do not have to spend a long time to learn
how to use this system, so the system’s movements
closely resemble natural hand motions.
Force Feedback

The system gets inputs of the current position of the
device (Ci) and a target position (Ti) at time i (i = 0...k) in
1kHz . At N times, the system calculates difference (Di)
between Ci and Ti.
!! = !! , !! , !! !(! = 0. . !)

(1)

!! = !! , !! , !! !(! = 0. . !)

(2)

!! = !! − !!

(3)

Force feedback is calculated using a standard force spring
model and a user can define the value of multiplier setting
the parameters in the external GUI. The calculated force
is used as parameters to move motors of the device.
!! = !!×!!!

(4)

Figure 4 shows the hand movements in Cartesian
coordinates (x and y). We first recorded a hand movement
of a user drawing a square in two-dimensional mid-air
space and this movement set as target positions. Then we
played it back so that another user can draw the same
square feeling the haptic feedback calculated with the
equation mentioned above. The maximum error was
4.43(mm).

Figure 4 Accuracy evaluation of the playback

We then measured the maximum force in threedimension. The result was 1.3N, 1.48N, 1.86N for x, y,
and z in Cartesian coordinates respectively. This is the
necessary force that users need when they want to reject
the support from the master at the maximum. In other
words, the users can override the feedback from the
master if necessary.
Force-Based Proficiency Metric

The more similarly the beginner plays to the master, the
less force feedback the beginner feels because he no
longer requires adjustment by the master. By looking at
the change in force feedback, we can create a numerical
learning metric that shows how correctly the beginner is
playing.

Figure 5 Force feedback can be used as proficiency metric

Figure 5 shows the same movements as the accuracy test
above. But we intentionally added one movement that
rejected the guide. We can see that the extra force is
provided in order to get the beginner’s movement to the
correct positions.
By combining audial feedback, we can make it more
efficient for a master to teach a beginner. This can also be
used by a beginner to see, numerically, how much he has
improved.

Figure 6 System Configuration of Record-Playback System

Figure 7 System Configuration of Remote-Teaching System

FUNCTIONALITY

With the implementation above, we created two different
modes the system: Record-Playback and RemoteTeaching.
Record-Playback System

An important aspect of musical learning is practice and,
by extension, repetition. The haptic system we developed
allows a teacher to record his movements so that a student
can playback the sequence as many times as he might
desire and learn from a consistent set of motions. (Figure
6) By placing the coordinates of the device in a queue
every millisecond, the motions of the master can be
replayed with high fidelity at a later point in time.
Given the same type of device, the same sequence can be
replayed on every device, thus expanding the lesson
setting from an individual session to one closer
resembling a classroom. Alternatively, our interface
allows the teacher to record different sets of motions on
different devices, which reincorporates the ideas behind
one-on-one teaching into the wider classroom.
Remote-Teaching System

The two devices can communicate with each other and an
external graphical user interface over a UDP connection.
(Figure 7) Over this connection, the two devices can
synchronize their movements and positions and this
synchronicity can be adjusted according to parameters set
in the external GUI. (Figure 8) Our system supports
bidirectional force feedback. In other words, not only can
a beginner feel what a master is doing, but the master can
also feel what the beginner is doing. By changing the
value of multiplier, the beginner may also change how
much he wants to feel the feedback from the master.

Figure 8 (a) Two devices are synchronized over UDP
connection (b) Scaling functionality (c) Offset functionality (d)
Graphical User Interface of the system.
Remote Teaching in Real-Time

One device guides the movements of the other and force
parameters can be adjusted so that the guided device feels
the instructions of the teaching device more or less
strongly, thus allowing the student less or more freedom
(respectively) to make his own motions. Conversely, the
guided device’s parameters may be adjusted to allow the
teacher to feel more or less of the student’s movements.
By adjusting the position scale between the two devices,
the motions of one can reflect the amplified motions of
the other; for example, moving a device one inch to the
right could make the other move two inches to the right.
This allows a student the chance to appreciate even subtle
movements by first feeling them in an amplified manner.
The position of the devices is given in three-dimensional
Cartesian space. By implementing the ability to offset one
device’s motion a set quantity (in terms of x, y, and z)
from the other, a master can adjust a pitch of the other
device in case the tunings of two devices are different. In
case of theremin, pitches might be different even at the
same coordinates due to the surrounding environment that
affects the electromagnetic field.
Furthermore, with the offset functionality, the two devices
can become more than the sum of their parts. In the case
of the theremin, offsetting one device from the other can

allow the two to play in harmony, thus adding another
aspect—that of collaboration—to a student’s education.
EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we explored the possibility of using haptic
feedback for a musical instrument.
Record-Playback

In 2002 work by Feygin looked at learning motor skills
with haptic feedback, and they found that visual training
was better for teaching the trajectory shape whereas
temporal aspects of the task were more effectively learned
from haptic guidance. [20] Therefore in this experiment,
we compare the effectiveness of haptic feedback to visual
feedback, as applied to playing a musical instrument. The
participants of this experiment consist of 3 males (21, 25
and 32 years old) and 2 females (20 and 25 years old).
None of the participants play musical instruments on a
daily basis nor have they taken any serious lessons of
musical instruments. They were asked to play different
notes in series and they received three different feedbacks
during the experiments: visual, haptic and visual-haptic
(Figure 9). Haptic feedback is provided by a master's hand
movements. We randomized the order of the feedback
depending on the participants in order to get rid of
“getting used to” results.

Figure 9 Comparison of visual, haptic and visual-haptic

For visual feedback, we used a pitch detector, which is
commonly used for practicing musical instruments. The
pitch detector could detect 12 different pitches (C note to
B note) as the participants played and the note was
projected on a display as shown in Figure 9. The
experiment was conducted twice and we recorded
novice's hand movement in x, y, z and compared the
result with the master's hand movement.
Result

Figure 10 shows the result of experiments with visual,
haptic and visual-haptic feedback respectively for each
participant with the comparison of the master movements
in x coordinate.

Figure 10 The tests done with the haptic feedback (including visual-haptic) resulted in superior results compared to the tests done
with only visual feedback.

Figure 11 Force feedback that the participant 1
received during the experiment Test 1

The tests done with the haptic feedback (including visualhaptic) resulted in superior to the tests done with only
visual feedback. In terms of hitting the correct notes, the
tests done with visual also resulted correctly.
Interestingly, some participants said that they didn’t know
if they should move their hands to the right or left, and
that made them take several seconds until they hit the
correct note. Even though they could hit the correct notes,
the timing and speed deviated from the original tune,
whereas the haptic feedback allowed users to copy all of
the movements, such as shifting from one note to another,
correctly. This is extremely important when playing a
musical instrument as the way one shifts between notes
can dictate a wide variety of sounds. The visual-haptic
support resulted slightly better than the haptic-only
support. Figure 11 shows the force feedback that the
participant1 (female participant) was getting during the
experiment Test1 with the visual-haptic support and the
visual-only support. Force feedback was provided when
she shifted from one note to another. When she got closer
to the point, we can see that she felt slightly stronger
adjustment at the first and the last notes when guided by
the haptic-only system. This metric makes it possible to
evaluate their improvement in hand manipulations.
Remote-Teaching

In addition to the experiment above, we asked a master
with 3 years of experience in playing a theremin to play
"Happy Birthday Song". (Figure 12) First we asked a
beginner (a 25 year old who had never played the
theremin before) to practice the song for 20 minutes. We
recorded
his
hand
movements
in
Cartesian
coordinates. Second, the master taught the beginner via
the remotely connected haptic devices and we gave them
another 20 minutes of practice. We compared the hand
movements of before and after practicing. We conducted
these two experiments in different days (the second
experiment was conducted a week later of the first
experiment day) in order to make it clear whether the
training itself had an effect or whether participants got
more practice in a given condition.

Figure 12 A master teaches a beginner how to play a song

Result

Figure 13 shows the hand movements of the beginner
playing the song after 20 minutes of self-practicing and
with the Remote-Teaching system. When he first started
practicing, he tended to ignore the visual tuning display
and kept playing the song with incorrect pitches.

Figure 13 Remote-Teaching system helped a beginner learn
effectively

After a few minutes, he began to use feedback from the
pitch detector. Repeating this routine ended up being
inefficient since the sound feedback he received
sometimes contained incorrect sounds. After 20 minutes
of practice, the sounds he created remained mismatched
to the original melody. The tempo and rhythm were
likewise different from the master’s song.
On the other hand, in Remote-Teaching system, the
master kept asking the beginner to adjust the tuning and
hit the first note correctly (in the case of “Happy Birthday
Song”, the first note is C) throughout the whole
experiment. This allowed the beginner to get a correct
feedback and he modification of the movements were
made notes by notes. As a result, the beginner could play
the similar pitch with more correct rhythm.

MOVEME AS A LEARNING SYSTEM

The system is capable of letting a user perform a song,
even for the first time trial. Self-achievement is always a
pleasure and thus encourages a beginner to continue
practicing.
It is important to mention that our system is very effective
when it comes to practicing a theremin, as pitch is created
by changing the emitted electromagnetic field with one’s
hand. Thus, it is not appropriate for a master to step in
since it might affect the field generated by the instrument.
With our system, the master can teach remotely or the
beginner can use the pre-recorded movements of the
master to play.
As to “learning” in general, we can design a learning
routine using MoveMe. (Figure 14) We assume that the
Record-Playback mode can allow a user to learn how he
should move his hand. Through the experiment, we found
that people with no experience in playing a musical
instrument cannot tell whether they should move their
hand to right or left in order to shift from one note to
another. This functionality would help people learn in
what direction and roughly how far they should move
their hand. We also found that people tend to ignore other
forms of feedback when they receive guidance from the
haptic device. This is possibly because it is too hard for
users to pay attention to both haptic and audial feedback.
As a future work, we plan to make our system more
interactive so that the system can give them information
that would encourage them to adjust the tuning.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Technical limitations

In order to pursue the scalability of our system, we need
to take into account some technical limitations that We
aim to as we explore further research.
Comparison with other types of feedback

As the first prototype, our system adopted Phantom
Haptic, which is only capable of providing x, y, and z
positions and cannot provide pitch, roll and yaw
parameters. In this paper, we found out that our system is
effective in terms of hand manipulation for shifting from
one point to another. This appears to be an advantage
compared to other types of feedback such as vibro-tactile
feedback, which does not provide such clear instructions
in terms of direction. In the future, we would like to
explore subtlety in hand movements including rotation
angels and conduct further experiments to compare other
types of feedback in several conditions.
Connectivity between two haptic devices

Our system allows a master to teach a beginner remotely
via haptic devices. We adopted UDP protocol in localhost
and we didn’t find any issues in terms of latency.
However, in real-world applications where the connection
would take place over other network areas we would
likely have to take into account delays in connectivity.
Considering the fact playing musical instruments requires
a real-time feedback, this should be explored in detail.
Other Musical instruments

In this paper, we explored the possibility of using our
system for 3D hand manipulation relevant to musical
instruments. By combining our system with finger
manipulation projects, we can expand the applications of
the system. For example, with a finger manipulation
system and a position detection system like motion
capture cameras, the combined system can teach users
how to properly hold a string on guitar or violin and our
system can teach how to stroke. As a future work, we
would like to improve our system and explore the
possibility of applying our research to other musical
instruments.
CONCLUSION

Figure 14 Design of learning routing using MoveMe

We believe that the Remote-Teaching can be effective for
learning musical instruments. This mode is an extension
of the conventional “hand in hand” system. In our
experiment, the master kept asking the beginner to adjust
the tuning and hit each note throughout the whole
experiment. Every time the beginner hit next note, the
master adjusted with sending a subtle haptic feedback. In
this way, a beginner can get correct audio feedback as
well as how he should move his hands.

We developed a system called “MoveMe” that provides
three-dimensional haptic support for playing a musical
instrument. The system has two different modes, RecordPlayback and Remote-Teaching mode. In the RecordPlayback mode, an expert can pre-record his movements
so that beginners can play it back later as necessary.
Remote-Teaching mode connects an expert and a
beginner via two haptic robots and the expert can, in real
time, guide and correct the beginner’s movement. By
looking at the change in force feedback, users can tell
how much they have improved in via a numerical metric
which we refer to as “Force-Based Proficiency Metric”.

The master can use this metric in order to know how
much the beginner has improved. In the experiments, we
found out that our system can help beginner to play a
song at the correct speed and rhythm. When a beginner
was connected with a master through this system, the
beginner could practice a song more effectively than he
could by practicing without the system. We then
discussed the possibility of using our system as a learning
method, which was followed by a description of the
technical limitations. Further research is to be conducted
in order to explore the full potential of the system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank all our supporting colleagues at the MIT Media
Lab and the Jun Rekimoto’s lab, who have provided us
the insights and suggestions that enabled us to realize this
project.
REFERENCES

[1] Guanyang Liu1, Keke Lu1, Yuru Zhang1 and
Lingzhi Liu. 2013. Networked Haptic Interaction to
Implement “Hand in Hand” Human Motor Skill Training
for Tank Gunnery. In International Journal of Advanced
Robotic Systems, ISSN 1729-8806
[2] Kevin Huang, Thad Starner, Ellen Do, Gil Weiberg,
Claas Ahlrichs, Ruediger. 2010. Mobile music touch:
mobile tactile stimulation for passive learning. CHI '10
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems Pages 791-800

computing systems(CHI EA '11). ACM, New York, NY,
USA
[9] Xiao Xiao, Basheer Tome, and Hiroshi Ishii. 2014.
Andante: Walking Figures on the Piano Keyboard to
Visualize Musical Motion. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression (NIME ‘14).
[10] Activision. Guitar hero. http://guitarhero.com/, 2013.
[11] Using Haptics to Assist Performers in Making
Gestures to a Musical Instrument (Edgar Berdahl, Günter
Niemeyer, Julius O. Smith), In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical
Expression (Noel Zahler, Roger B. Dannenberg, Tom
Sullivan, eds.), 2009.
[12] J. Amores, X. Benavides, P. Maes. ”ShowMe: A
Remote Collaboration System that Supports Immersive
Gestural Communication”. In CHI’15 Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2015). ACM.
[13] Hick, C., and Hartmann, J. Intensivkurs Physiologie.
Elsevier, Urban & Fischer, 2006.
[14] Hagn, U., Ortmaier, T., Konietschke, R., Kubler,
B.,Seibold, U., Tobergte, A., Nickl, M., Jorg, S., and
Hirzinger, G. Telemanipulator for remote minimally
invasive surgery. Robotics Automation Magazine, IEEE
15, 4 (2008), 28–38.

[3] Emi Tamaki, Takashi Miyaki, Jun Rekimoto. 2011.
PossessedHand: a hand gesture manipulation system
using electrical stimuli. Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
Pages 543-552

[15] Max Pfeiffer,Stefan Schneegass,Florian Alt. Michael
RohsLet me grab this: a comparison of EMS and
vibration
for
haptic
feedback
in
free-hand
interaction.Proceeding AH '14 Proceedings of the 5th
Augmented Human International Conference Article No.
48

[4] M. Weing, A. Ro ̈hlig, K. Rogers, J. Gugenheimer, F.
Schaub, B. Ko ̈nings, E. Rukzio, and M. Weber. 2013.
P.I.A.N.O.: Enhancing instrument learning via interactive
projected augmentation. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM
conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing
adjunct publication.

[16] Lehtinen, V., Oulasvirta, A., Salovaara, A., and
Nurmi, P. Dynamic tactile guidance for visual search
tasks. In Proceedings of the 25th annual ACM symposium
on User interface software and technology, UIST ’12,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2012), 445–452.

[5] Zoran, Amit, R. S. S. N., and Paradiso, J. A. The
hybrid artisans: A case study in smart tools. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact, 21,3 (2013), 15.
[6] Roy Shilkrot, Pattie Maes, A. Z. Physical painting
with a digital airbrush. SIGGRAPH 2014 Emerging
Technologies and Studio.
[7] Katsuhito Akahane, Jungwoo Hyun, Itsuo
Kumazawa, Makoto Sato. Two-Handed Multi-finger
String-Based Haptic Interface SPIDAR-8. Springer Series
on Touch and Haptic Systems 2013, pp 109-147
[8] Xiao, X., and Ishii, H.
MirrorFugue for Single User
Performances. Proceedings of
conference extended abstracts

Duet for Solo Piano:
Playing with Recorded
the 30th international
on Human factors in

[17] Pedro Lopes, Patrik Jonell, and Patrick Baudisch.
Affordance++: allowing objects to communicate dynamic
use. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems Pages 2515-2524.
[18] SensAble Technologies. http://geomagic.com/.
[19] Takegawa, Y., Terada, T., and Tsukamoto, M.
Design and Implementation of a Piano Practice Support
System using a real-time Fingering Recognition
Technique. Proceeding of International Computer Music
Conference (ICMC2011), pp. 1--8 (Aug. 2011).
[20] Feygin, Keehner, Tendick, “Haptic Guidance:
Experimental Evaluation of a Haptic Training Method for
a Perceptual Motor Skill”, Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
Environment and Teleoperator Systems, 2002. HAPTICS
2002. Proceedings. 10th Symposium on.

