2.5 Dimensional Panoramic Viewing Technique
utilizing a Cylindrical Mirror Widget
Kaori Ikematsu
Ochanomizu University
2-1-1, Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 112-8610, Japan
g0920502@gmail.com

Mana Sasagawa
Ochanomizu University
2-1-1, Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 112-8610, Japan
g1120520@is.ocha.ac.jp

Itiro Siio
Ochanomizu University
2-1-1, Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 112-8610, Japan
siio@acm.org

ABSTRACT

We propose a panoramic viewing system, which applies the
technique of Anamorphosis, mapping a 2D display onto a
cylindrical mirror. In this system, a distorted scene image
is shown on a flat panel display or tabletop surface. When a
user places the cylindrical mirror on the display, the original
image appears on the cylindrical mirror. By simply rotating
the cylinder, a user can decide the direction to walk-through
in VR world.

Figure 1. Anamorphicons, tangible user interface method using anamorphosis.

Author Keywords

Anamorphosis; Tangible UIs; Phicon
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2 User Interfaces: Input devices and strategies
INTRODUCTION

In [2], Hiroshi Ishii defined a Tangible User Interface (TUI)
as a direct manipulation of digital information. Recently, creation of various battery-less TUIs that are used on a tabletop
surface has risen dramatically. Focusing on TUIs that display
information on their own surfaces, Halskov augmented a tangible widget with a three dimensional projection mapping[1].
In [3], translucent tangible widgets transport information on
the top of the surface from an underlying display. These widgets have a specific appearance associated with a logical object or specialized functions for enhanced specificity. However, the contents appear on the surfaces are limited. For example, a human face shaped widget[3] is unsuitable for images other than facial expression images. We demonstrated
Anamorphicons[4] as a battery-less passive input-output TUI.
This application consists of a tangible cylindrical mirror and
capacitive touch pens. The technique enables a user to interact with an image projected on a physical icon (phicon), by
applying the concept of the mirror anamorphosis to a multi
touch display and mirror device. The cylindrical mirror widget allows the user to view the pseudo stereoscopic images.

Figure 2. The system detects an asymmetric polygon formed by the tip
of touch pens on the bottom of the cylinder. It computes and follows the
cylinder rotation of the angles.

In this paper, we present a new panoramic viewing system
using Anamorphicons. When a user places the cylinder on
the center of the display, 360 degrees panoramic image will
appear on its surface. We introduced the concept of a surrogate for this application. That is, the Anamorphicons placed
on the display becomes an agent of the user, and the scenery
from the viewpoint of the Aramorphicons agent is exhibited
on the mirror surface.
ANAMORPHICONS

Anamorphosis is a painting technique that draws distorted images (Fig.1 left). The viewers are required to use special devices or to adopt a specific perspective to recognize the undistorted image. It is an optical phenomenon with the property
that when a curved mirror reflects a picture on a flat surface,
the image of the picture reflected in the mirror looks distorted
to the observer. It enables stereoscopic vision based on binocular parallax. We have implemented an interactive cylindrical
mirror anamorphosis using a flatpanel display and a cylindrical mirror placed on the display. We named our cylindrical
mirror device “Anamorphicons” by combining anamorphosis
and phicons (physical icons).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be
honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985737

145

Figure 3. A original panoramic picture is converted to a distorted image
for Anamorphicons by using polar coordinates filter in the application.

Figure 5. White arrows indicates a direction to next panoramic view.
The colored arrow indicates whether a path to the next view exists (Red
arrow) or not (Blue arrow) in current direction.

we adapt the panoramic scenery image to the cylindrical mirror and view from the outside of the cylinder, an appropriate
mental model is required for the Anamorphicons. Our application employs a physical avatar, that is, the Anamorphicons
represent a surrogate of a user. For ease in understanding
the model, we attached a figure to the top of the Anamorphicons (Fig.4 right). This figure will make it clear that the
reflected scenery corresponds to the viewpoint of the doll position on the mirror. Fig.4 the application window displayed
on the screen. The right side window contains the map area
while the left side contains the distorted image of the sceneries. In the map area, a pictogram indicates a current position
of a panoramic view. When a user drags a pictogram to any
location, corresponding viewing images will appear on the
left side area. Then, as a user places the pictogram at any
place, the anamorphic image on the screen is reflected on the
cylinder surface that corrects the distorted image so that the
image on the cylinder looks normal to the user. The application translates the angle of the direction of the view from
the current position by utilizing the pattern generated by the
touch pens. Fig.5 shows snapshots of the application. A image of white arrows indicates paths for next panoramic view
exists in the direction. When a user put a cylinder on the iPad,
blue arrow image is overlaid (Fig.5 left) on the panoramic
image. It moves according to the cylinder rotation angle.
When a user rotates the Anamorphicons to move the blue
arrow to white arrow direction, the blue arrow turns to red
(Fig.5 right). Then a user can move to next panoramic view
by touching the screen.

Figure 4. (Left) A screen shot of the distorted panoramic image and
map view on the iPad. (Right) A user can decide the direction to walkthrough simply by rotating the Anamorphicons.

IMPLEMENTATION

We have implemented an Anamorphicon system using an
iPad as a display and detector for our cylindrical mirror. The
system supports interactively generates content when browsing a 360 degree view of a scene. It was implemented using javascript, HTML5 and to get panoramic images, we use
Google Maps API1 . To detect the coordinates and rotation
of the cylindrical mirror placed on the iPad, we placed three
touch pens inside a reflective cylinder, on opposite sides, all
of which touched the bottom, as illustrated in Fig.2. The top
side of the cylindrical mirror is consists of aluminum. The
touch pens and the aluminum board are connected by electric
leads to detect the user’s manipulation. Three touch pens are
arranged in an asymmetric fashion, then the triangle formed
by tips of the touch pens are recognized as a unique pattern.
With this structure, as the user touches the aluminum part,
the iPad application is able to detect the coordinates of three
points from the touch pens. By computing the arrangement of
the three touch pens, the algorithm can determine the position
of the cylinder. It can also detect the rotation of the cylinder
relative to the position of the three touch pens. Depending
on the rotation angle, direction to walk-through the VR contents is decided. The application converts panoramic pictures
of sceneries (Fig.3). It changes the image shown on the iPad
display according to the current position on the map. When
a user is rotating the physical cylindrical mirror using his/her
hand, an arrow image on sceneries from a certain angle is
shown. It indicates the direction to travel.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we demonstrated a Anamorphicon system,
which provides interaction between the user and the image
on a cylinder by detecting the rotation of the cylinder. We
are planning to conduct experiments to compare the Anamorphicons panoramic viewer to the Google street view.
REFERENCES

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

1. Dalsgaard, P., and Halskov, K. Tangible 3d tabletops: Combining tangible tabletop
interaction and 3d projection. In Proc. NordiCHI ’12, ACM (2012), 109–118.

We have developed a map based panoramic viewer that provides a 360 degrees panoramic image from specified positions on the map view. In the previous work, Anamorphicons
represents a virtual item itself. In this work, it represents
360 degree sceneries surround an observation point. When
1

2. Ishii, H., and Ullmer, B. Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces between people,
bits and atoms. In Proc. CHI’97 (1997), 234–241.
3. Sato, T., Mamiya, H., Koike, H., and Fukuchi, K. Photoelastictouch: Transparent
rubbery tangible interface using an lcd and photoelasticity. In Proc. UIST’97, ACM
(2009), 43–50.
4. Suga, C., and Siio, I. Anamorphicons: An extended display with a cylindrical
mirror. In Proc. ITS’11, ACM (2011), 242–243.

https://developers.google.com/maps/

146

