Making Fabrication Real
Xiang ‘Anthony’ Chen
HCI Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
xiangchen@acm.org
a

c

b

d

Figure 1. With the print-over technique, the user specifies where to attach to an existing object (a), the system analyzes, orients and scaffolds the object
(b) and generates G-code controlling an FDM printer to directly fabricate the attachment onto the object (c), which can augment it for custom purposes,
such as making a fridge magnet from an existing Teddy bear toy.

However, despite these advances in the virtual world, our ability as end-users to transform the physical world has remained
limited. However, the emergence of low-cost fabrication technology (most notably 3D printing) has sought to change this.

ABSTRACT

Low-cost, easy-to-use 3D printers have promised to empower
everyday users with the ability to fabricate physical objects of
their own design. While these printers specialize in building
objects from scratch, they are innately oblivious to the real
world in which the printed objects will be situated and in
use. In my thesis research, I develop fabrication techniques
with tool integration to enable users to expressively specify
how a design can be attached to, augment, adapt, support, or
otherwise function with existing real world objects. In this
paper, I describe projects to date as well as ongoing work that
explores this space of research.

Despite the promises of 3D printing, the technology itself is
innately oblivious of the physical world—things are, in most
cases, assumed to be printed from scratch in isolation from the
real world objects they will be attached to and work with.
To bridge this ‘gulf of fabrication’, my thesis research focuses
on developing fabrication techniques with tool integration to
enable users to expressively create designs that can be attached
to and function with existing real world objects.

ACM Classification Keywords

To tackle this problem, my first project explores a range of
attachment options between 3D printed and real world objects.
Specifically, I have developed Encore [1] —a design tool with
a suite of techniques that allow a user, with an consumer grade
Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) printer, to directly print
attachments over, around or through existing objects with
consideration of both objects’ geometric properties.

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation: User Interfaces.
Author Keywords

Fabrication; 3D printing; real world objects; augmentation;
adaptation; design tool.

While Encore provides attachment solutions, it remains unclear how to design such attachments in user-customized ways.
Such design tasks are usually difficult for non-experts with
general-purpose modeling software. To overcome this obstacle, my next project focuses on enabling the design of 3D
printable add-on components that can adapt everyday objects
for user-defined purposes. Specifically, I develop Reprise
[2]—a design tool that leverages simple interaction techniques
and computational geometry for users to specify, generate,
customize and fit such adaptations onto existing objects.

BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION

The increasingly personal and ubiquitous capabilities of
computing—everything from smartphones to virtual reality—
are enabling us to build a brave new world in the digital realm.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984785

However, either extending or adapting existing objects only
allows for incremental ‘delta’ for transforming the real world.

17

a

a

b

b

Figure 2. Examples of print-to-affix: making a glue gun stand attached
using adhesives (a) and a reusable ‘4 pack’ holder attached using zip ties
(b).

Figure 3. Example of a print-through process: the printer pauses at a
point where the scissors can be dropped to interlock with the name tag,
after which the print job resumes.

In my ongoing work, I am developing a design tool that takes
a mixed-initiative approach to guide users to compose and
fabricate self-contained objects based on the functional requirements they will face once installed and deployed in the
real world. Specifically, users start with sketching a design
from their intuition; the system in the background optimizes
their initial design based on the functional requirements; then
users can further tweak the design while the system provides
feedback and suggestion for keeping it functional.

simply bring in ready-made objects, digitalize and use them to
model a target object [8].
Fabricating Augmentation of Real World Objects

The need to augment everyday objects predated the dawn of
personal fabrication. For example, Davidoff et al. propose
‘mechanical hijacking’ - using motors that are designed to
actuate existing controls or physical interface in specific ways
[3]. However, these ‘hijacking’ devices have to be manually
designed. RetroFab, on the other hand, provides a design
environment for end users to scan existing physical interfaces,
design new add-ons to modify their controls, and fabricate and
install them so as to automate or optimize the usage with these
devices or appliances [9].

Through the exploration in these projects, my thesis contributes to the vision of personal fabrication by bridging the
design and making process to encompass a range of real world
objects as well as the functional relationships with them. In
the remainders of this paper, I review related literature, present
my projects to date, describe my ongoing work, and discuss
lessons learnt as well as opportunities for future research.

One fundamental issue of 3D printed augmentations is how to
attach them to existing objects. Teibrich et al. explore the idea
of ‘patching physical object’. Their printer—augmented with
a milling bit and a 5 degree-of-freedom movement platform—
is able to mill out parts of an existing object so that new
components can be readily printed on it [10].

RELATED WORK

Two themes of existing research has sought to make fabrication
real: (i) using real world objects as components to fabricate
new designs; and (ii) fabricating augmentation that modifies
or enhances existing objects.

RESEARCH TO DATE

My research to date has explored techniques for fabricating
attachments onto real world objects, which then extends to
the design of such functional attachments, e.g., fabricating
adaptations that can mechanically repurpose existing objects.

Real World Objects as Components for New Fabrication

Research that follows the first approach is perhaps motivated
by the need to overcome the limited speed of 3D printing—if
it is possible to substitute 3D printed parts with something that
already exists, less of the object needs to be printed hence the
smaller amount of overall time.

Encore: Attaching Fabricated to Real World Objects

Although it is a common practice for people to attach one
object to another (e.g., using adhesives), relatively little is
understood about how this process can benefit from the additive manufacturing capabilities of 3D printers. In developing
Encore, my goal is to push the boundary of 3D printing to
explore the variety of techniques whereby a printed piece can
be attached to an existing object.

For example, faBrickation substitutes the majority of an object with Lego bricks while only keeping precision-sensitive
components to be 3D printed [6]. While this approach only
provides fairly limited resolution; however, it manages to instantiate a rough object of a user’s design, which is amenable
to the iterative design process. Luo et al. go beyond prototyping and attains to make functional objects with Lego bricks by
applying a force-based analysis to achieve a layout that makes
the target object stable even at a fairly large scale [5]. Yoshida
et al. go even further, using chopsticks as primitive building
blocks for constructing architecture-scale objects [11].

Print-Over prints an attachment directly onto an existing object. Encore analyzes the feasibility of printing a new part at
different surface locations of the object (e.g., whether there is
a relatively flat area, and whether the extruder will collide with
the existing object whilst printing the new one). The result is
visualized as a heat map to inform the users of the properties of
their proposed design (Figure 1b). Once an attachment point
is selected, the object is oriented and scaffolded with support
structures to provide a feasible and stable configuration for
direct print-over (Figure 1c).

The generalized idea is anything can become part of something we wish to fabricate, at least geometrically. 3D collage
demonstrates this idea by allowing artist to compose a target
geometry with a collection of other objects [4]. RealFusion
provides a 3D reconstructing environment wherein a user can

18

Figure 4. Reprise provides tool integration and a formalized design workflow for making 3D printable adaptations onto everyday objects. For example,
an occupational therapist can use our tool to explore different strategies of adapting a wire cutter (a), such as creating a wrapper to soften the grip (b-e),
adding two levers to assist with clutching (f-h), or replacing one lever with an anchor to situate the cutter on the work surface (i-m).

Print-to-Affix uses a connector that matches the surface geometry of the existing object and also snug-fits to the attachment.
This allows the attachment to be fabricated separately, and
made to be affixed using fasteners or adhesives. Encore analyzes how the object’s surface properties afford a given affixing
mechanism (e.g., how the convexity of a cross section affects
using straps). Figure 2 shows two print-to-affix examples.

Once the actions are specified, this information is fed into
a library of design strategies—Wrapper/Extension, Handle,
Lever, Anchor/Stand, and Guide. These adaptation strategies
were derived from an analysis of over 3000 lifehacking and
assistive technology examples found in books and online communities. A user can select one or more strategies, which
automatically generate an initial design of an adaptation, such
as a wrapper for a cutter’s handle (Figure 4c), levers for easing
clutching operation (Figure 4g), or a structure to anchor the
cutter for situated use (Figure 4i).

Print-Through leverages the structural holes in some existing
objects (e.g., keys and rings) to print the attachment through
and around it. To accomplish this, the attachment is partially
printed, the existing object is placed so that part of the attachment goes through the existing object, and then printing
continues until the two objects are interlocked and the print
is complete. Encore performs physics simulation to compute
when to pause the print so that the attachment can be inserted
without interfering the remainders of the print job. Figure 3
shows an example of the print-through process.

To further iterate on the design, a user can manipulate simple
slider widgets to customize these adaptations to better suit the
person’s needs and preferences, such as making the cutter’s
wrapper longer and thicker for easier gripping (Figure 4d),
increasing the levers’ torque for clutching (Figure 4g), or
adjusting the overall size for aesthetics. Finally, Reprise also
provides a simple toolkit for making the adaptations more
attachable onto the objects, such as generating a pipe clamp
that connects the cutter’s handle to the anchor (Figure 4k).

Reprise: Fabricating Adaptations on Real World Objects

The main contribution of the Reprise lies in its ability to automatically generate and iterate across a range of likely useful
adaptations. It can also be seen as an early exemplar in a class
of design tools that go beyond the specification of geometry
alone to provide very application domain specific knowledge
and features related to real world objects. This helps to substantially reduce the gulf of execution [7] that users must
bridge as they cross from geometry to function, e.g., from
geometric form to the implications of that geometry on the
desired end result when used in the real world.

While Encore provides attachment solutions, it remains unclear how users design such attachments to work with existing
objects, such as to adapt objects in customized ways. As a
next step, I developed Reprise, a design tool for specifying,
generating, customizing and fitting functional adaptations onto
everyday objects.
Specifically, Reprise allows a user to specify how an object
is used and with what types of action, such as using a virtual
hand (Figure 4b) to indicate how a person would hold a wire
cutter. As 3D geometry itself does not encode how an object
is used in the real world, Reprise’ techniques enable a user to
interactively describe this information in situ on models of the
objects.

ONGOING RESEARCH

To tackle the grand challenge of transforming the physical
world, my next step would go beyond making add-on aug-

19

mentations or adaptations, but rather focus on designing and
fabricating larger-scale objects that also have to address various functional requirements of the real world.

help and support of my work. This work was funded in part by
the National Science Foundation under grant NSF IIS 1217929
and Adobe Research PhD Fellowship.

In both Encore and Reprise, the design task is based on an
existing object and the outcome is some sort of extension that
enhances a specific function of that object. While this approach works for creating something incremental (e.g., adaptation), it becomes problematic when scaling up—creating
self-contained objects such as bookshelf, step stool, or wine
rack.

REFERENCES

1. Chen, X., Coros, S., Mankoff, J., and Hudson, S. E.
Encore: 3d printed augmentation of everyday objects
with printed-over, affixed and interlocked attachments. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software & Technology, ACM (2015), 73–82.
2. Chen, X., Kim, J., Mankoff, J., Grossman, T., Coros, S.,
and Hudson, S. E. Reprise: A design tool for specifying,
generating, and customizing 3d printable adaptations on
everyday objects. In the 29th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software & Technology, ACM (2016).

There are several challenges in designing this class of objects.
Foremost, as they are no longer incremental add-ons to existing objects, it would be difficult to create a design in situ
from these real world objects. Consider making a bookshelf.
It is less straightforward if one has to start the design with
some books; rather, a more intuitive approach is the reverse:
create the bookshelf first, then see if it has enough space, or
is strong enough to accommodate the books. However, for
non-expert users, it is hard to create a functional design by
intuition. A user might have an intuition about what their
bookshelf should look like, and might be able to sketch the
design; but they would probably have trouble making sure that
this design would work—that is, supporting all the books to
be put on it.

3. Davidoff, S., Villar, N., Taylor, A. S., and Izadi, S.
Mechanical hijacking: how robots can accelerate
ubicomp deployments. In Proceedings of the 13th
international conference on Ubiquitous computing, ACM
(2011), 267–270.
4. Gal, R., Sorkine, O., Popa, T., Sheffer, A., and Cohen-Or,
D. 3d collage: expressive non-realistic modeling. In
Proceedings of the 5th international symposium on
Non-photorealistic animation and rendering, ACM
(2007), 7–14.

To ensure that a design meets its functional requirement, one
popular approach is to employ topology optimization—a wellestablished practice in mechanical and civil engineering. Essentially, topology optimization ‘automates’ the design process by reducing the design input to only the functional requirements, e.g., overall size, amount of material, weight of
loads, how the object is affixed to the world. The method then
attempts to generate the strongest possible design given all
these parameters as constraints. Although it gives functional
assurance, from an HCI standpoint, topology optimization is
too much of a ‘black box’ that gives users very little control
of expressing or editing their own design.

5. Luo, S.-J., Yue, Y., Huang, C.-K., Chung, Y.-H., Imai, S.,
Nishita, T., and Chen, B.-Y. Legolization: optimizing
lego designs. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 34,
6 (2015), 222.
6. Mueller, S., Mohr, T., Guenther, K., Frohnhofen, J., and
Baudisch, P. fabrickation: fast 3d printing of functional
objects by integrating construction kit building blocks. In
Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems, ACM (2014),
3827–3834.
7. Norman, D. A. The design of everyday things: Revised
and expanded edition. Basic books, 2013.

In my ongoing work, I want to combine the best parts of both
worlds: enabling users to sketch functional objects of their
design by bootstrapping the process with topology optimization to transform the design into a functional one. Meanwhile,
users will also receive step-by-step feedback and suggestion
that connects the two worlds: as they create or edit their work,
visualization informs them how the functionality is changing
and what are the options to tweak the current design while
staying with constraints. This mixed-initiative approach allows the system to assist users with their design task without
limiting their freedom of creating or editing the object. As a
result, users can benefit from delegating the functional aspects
of design to the system while focusing on the visual appearance and styles. I hope such a design environment can help
people fabricate a variety of things that meet real world requirements without imposing too much expertise requirements
on the users.

8. Piya, C., Vinayak, Zhang, Y., and Ramani, K. Realfusion:
An interactive workflow for repurposing real-world
objects towards early-stage creative ideation. In
Proceedings of the 42th Graphics Interface Conference
(2016).
9. Ramakers, R., Anderson, F., Grossman, T., and
Fitzmaurice, G. Retrofab: A design tool for retrofitting
physical interfaces using actuators, sensors and 3d
printing. Proc. of SIGCHI. ACM (2016).
10. Teibrich, A., Mueller, S., Guimbretière, F., Kovacs, R.,
Neubert, S., and Baudisch, P. Patching physical objects.
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software & Technology, ACM (2015),
83–91.
11. Yoshida, H., Igarashi, T., Obuchi, Y., Takami, Y., Sato, J.,
Araki, M., Miki, M., Nagata, K., Sakai, K., and Igarashi,
S. Architecture-scale human-assisted additive
manufacturing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
34, 4 (2015), 88.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank all my collaborators—Scott Hudson, Stelian Coros,
Tovi Grossman, Jennifer Mankoff and Jeeeun Kim—for their

20

