Toward a Compact Device to Interact with a
Capacitive Touch Screen
Tomomi Takashina1 , Tsutomu Tamura2 , Makoto Nakazumi1 , Tatsushi Nomura1 , Yuji Kokumai1
1
2
Nikon Corporation
Nikon Systems Inc.
{Tomomi.Takashina,Tsutomu.Tamura,Makoto.Nakazumi,Tatsushi.Nomura,Yuji.Kokumai}@nikon.com
finger touching. On the other hand, touch screens have an advantage that an input system and output system can be integrated into a single module. We consider this advantage could
make it possible to realize a new universal interface for both
human-to-machine (H2M) and machine-to-machine (M2M).

ABSTRACT

Capacitive touch screens are widely used in various products.
Touch screens have an advantage that an input system and
output system can be integrated into a single module. We
consider this advantage could make it possible to realize a
new universal interface for both human-to-machine (H2M)
and machine-to-machine (M2M). For a M2M interface, some
sort of method to simulate finger touching is needed. Therefore, we propose an alternative method to interact with a
touch screen using two electrical approaches. Our proposal
is effective in automating touch screen operations, modality
conversion device for people with disabilities, and so on. We
assembled a prototype to confirm the principle to control a
touch screen with the electrical methods. We believe that our
proposal will complement the weakness of touch screens and
expand their possibility.

Therefore, we propose an alternative method to interact with
a touch screen without fingers (we call this interaction quasitouch). Our approach is one methodology to realize supportive user interfaces [1]. Some test equipment manufacturers
produce inspecting machines to check that a touch screen device responds correctly to touch inputs using robot hands,
which needs a relatively large footprint. To solve this problem, we employed two electrical approaches to realize quasitouch: resistance control method and capacitance sensor control method, which only need small space. This scale factor
expands the potential of our alternative method significantly.

Author Keywords

In this paper, we describe our final goal and use cases at first,
then explain how quasi-touch works and a prototype as proofof-concept. Then we conclude.

touch screen; supportive user interface; M2M by H2M
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous

GOAL AND USE CASES

Though the key technology in this paper is how to realize
quasi-touch, we would like to describe the final goal of this
research. Our final goal is to develop a device which has “vision” to understand the contents of a screen and have the capability of “quasi-touch” to control a touch screen instead of
fingers. It might be necessary to have some communication
capability, program storage, an audio interface, and/or other
I/O devices depending on the application.

INTRODUCTION

Capacitive touch screens [3] are widely used in various products such as smart phones, digital cameras, home appliances,
industrial equipments, and car consoles. Thanks to their flexibility such as easy to change their appearance (virtual buttons,
on-screen keyboard, and so on), they could replace many conventional physical interface devices.

Figure 1 shows the appearance of the devices. A quasi-touch
unit is located in the bottom of a device (Figure 1(a)) or in the
L-shaped solid ((Figure 1(b)). The next section explains how
the latter can control the touch screen.

Though a touch screen can display its contents and functions
corresponding to the contexts, it is still difficult to meet special needs: some constraints on fingers, further improvements
on efficiency, connecting touch screens with other devices directly, and so on. Kato and et. al. proposed a method to
convert simple finger movements to complex touch inputs on
a touch screen just by attaching a transparent conductive film
[2]. However, the research by Kato and et. al. still needs
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

(a) Full cover type
(b) L-shaped type
Figure 1. Devices to Meet Our Final Goal: (a) A quasi-touch unit and
an image sensor are enclosed in the bottom. (b) A quasi-touch unit is
located in L-shape unit and a camera is fixed on the edge.

UIST’16 Adjunct October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
c 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984755

173

The basic principle of this method is to make the voltage of
the capacitive sensors lower enough at appropriate timings
by giving AC signals from the outside, because a time difference from the beginning of each scanning cycle corresponds
to a position of touch. As a simplified configuration, we developed a scan sampler/signal emitter (Figure 2(b)). In input
mode, it records scan signals by attaching the antenna probes
on the surface. Scan signals are recorded at each point to
touch in advance. Then it emits AC signals corresponding
to a specified touch position with synchronizing the scanning
cycle. Such an AC signal is processed (e.g. reversing phase)
from the recorded one corresponding to the position.

Automation

The proposed device automates touch operation sequences by
associating pattern matching with touch operations (i.e. if
icon A appears, then touch it). It is useful to control applications without any automation script functionality.
Remote Controller

In home appliances such as digital cameras, conventional remote controllers need special software on the main body side.
The proposed device enables home appliances to be controlled remotely if those home appliances have a touch screen.
Data Importer and Exporter

Some cloud-based consumer services do not have data importing and exporting functions. The proposed device can
operate any application and import data through a screen. It
actively works on an application by selecting menu items and
scrolling, and then recognizes data using the OCR.

Gate Electrodes
ＩＴＯ
IGZO/SiO2

Source Electrodes

Modality Conversion

(a) Structure of Variable Resistance Matrix

The proposed device recognizes the contents on a touch
screen and converts them into voice or braille. Then, it recognizes user inputs and converts them into touch inputs. Using
this device, we can change ordinary products to those usable
for people with disabilities. Tactile touch screens have also
been studied by a lot of researchers but they must be embedded into individual products.

(b) Scan Sampler/Signal Emitter

Figure 2. Prototype for Quasi-Touch
ITO（透明導電膜）

IGZO（チャネル層）
ソース電極

ゲート絶縁膜（SiO2）
ゲート電極

ドレイン電極

EXPERIMENT基板ON A SMART DEVICE

We assembled another prototype to automate touch operations on a smart device. This prototype consists of three antenna probes, emitters, control circuits, and an Arduino board.
We attached this prototype onto iPhone 5 and confirmed that
it generated quasi-touch signals at three positions, successfully invoked an application, and then went back to the home
screen. Please note that the on-screen home button can be
used by enabling the assistive touch option in iOS.

ELECTRICAL APPROACHES FOR QUASI-TOUCH

Capacitive sensing touch screens detect capacitance changes
by finger touching, which causes the movements of electrical
charges. To reproduce this phenomenon without real fingers,
some mechanism is required.

CONCLUSION

One approach is to cause the movement of electrical charges
directly on the surface by contacting semiconductor switches.
We call this approach resistance control method, which is
suitable for the design of Figure 1(a). Another approach is
to deceive capacitive sensors by giving AC signals from the
outside. By generating AC signals carefully, “touch” can be
simulated at any point. It is not necessary to contact a probe
physically at the point of quasi-touch. We call this approach
capacitive sensor control method, which is suitable for the
design of Figure 1(b).

We proposed an alternative method to interact with a capacitive touch screen to meet special needs and extend its use to
M2M interface. We believe that our proposal will complement the weakness of touch screens and expand their possibility. In the next step, we will develop the device to realize
the use cases described in this paper.
REFERENCES

1. Demeure, A., Lehmann, G., Petit, M., and Calvary, G.
Enhancing interaction with supplementary supportive
user interfaces (uis): Meta-uis, mega-uis, extra-uis,
supra-uis . . . In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGCHI
Symposium on Engineering Interactive Computing
Systems, EICS ’11, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2011),
333–334.

Resistance Control Method

We used a variable resistance matrix to drain electrical
charges on a specified point onto the ground. For such a
matrix, we developed a semiconductor device with IGZOTFT (Figure 2(a)) which changes resistance between 100kΩ
to several G Ω. We employed ITO to form the electrical circuits on the contact surface to make the wiring of the device
as short as possible in order to decrease its host capacitance.
Capacitive Sensor Control Method

2. Kato, K., and Miyashita, H. Extensionsticker: A proposal
for a striped pattern sticker to extend touch interfaces and
its assessment. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’15, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2015), 1851–1854.

Typical mutual capacitance touch screens scan the surface to
detect touch points. The control IC of touch screens emits
the pulses to drive switched-capacitance-filters (SCF) on the
electrodes of “drive” axis sequentially and capacitive sensors
measure the changes in capacitance on the “sensing” axis.

3. Lee, S., Buxton, W., and Smith, K. C. A multi-touch three
dimensional touch-sensitive tablet. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’85, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 1985),
21–25.

174

