Flying User Interface
Pramod Verma
Flying Interface
founder@flyinginterface.com

Figure 1. In left picture, Flying User Interface consists of (G) vacuum (or electroadhesion) based gripper, (R) motors for quadcopter, (B) computer, (P)
projector, (C) camera, and (A) robotic arm. In right picture, flying user interface (F) is projecting user interface (I) on the glass or semi-transparent
wall (W). User (U) is interacting with device using touch or natural gestures.

ABSTRACT

Author Keywords

This paper describes a special type of drone called “Flying
User Interface”1 , comprised of a robotic projector-camera
system, an onboard digital computer connected with the Internet, sensors, and a hardware interface capable of sticking
to any surface such as wall, ceilings, etc. Computer further
consists of other subsystems, devices, and sensors such as accelerometer, compass, gyroscope, flashlight, etc. Drone flies
from one place to another, detects a surface, and attaches itself to it. After a successful attachment, the device stops all
its rotators; it then projects or augments images, information,
and user interfaces on nearby surfaces and walls. User interface may contain applications, information about object being augmented and information from Internet. User can interact with user-interface using commands and gestures such as
hand, body, feet, voice, etc.

User Interface; Drone; Display Device; Augmented Reality.

1

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
Miscellaneous
INTRODUCTION

Currently available augmented reality devices such as projector camera systems, head-mounted displays, etc. are wearable
in nature. Mobile projector camera systems such as SixthSense [2] have various augmented reality applications. Due
to their mobility, they support various special projector camera system applications of many types and nature.
One problem with these devices is that they are not fully mobile and the user has to wear them all the time. For example,
it is difficult to project a path on the road during running or
walking because motion creates an unstable projection image or user interface. In another example we cannot use (or
wear) the system during some unusual scenario such as in the
shower. In another situation, these devices cannot display or
augment information above the user’s height without using
additional hardware such as rod, etc.

Patent Pending

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984770

A non-wearable system such as Displaydrone [3] is a
projector-equipped drone or multicopter (flying robot) that
projects information on the wall, surfaces, and objects in

203

physical space. Recently researchers also attempted to display information in mid-air using a device called “Flying Display” which consists of two UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) with a projector and a display screen. Some mobile
robots such as “Keecker” project information on the walls
while navigating around the home like a robotic vacuum
cleaner. In another example, LUMINAR [1] lamp system
consists of a robotic arm and a projector camera system designed to augment projection on a table surface.
One of the common drawbacks in drone based display system is continuous noise during the projection. These drone
systems also consume lots of power to stay in the air while
displaying projections. Displaydrone and SixthSense approaches each have a common problem of image flicker and
unstable projection due to their movement.
FLYING USER INTERFACE

Figure 2. A Prototype of Flying User Interface device projecting a user
interface on a wall using onboard projector camera system. Vacuum
based grippers were used to stick to ceiling.

To address above problem, this paper introduces a drone or
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle comprised of a robotic arm based
projector camera system, an onboard digital computer connected with the Internet and sensors, and a hardware interface
capable of sticking itself to any surface such as a wall, ceilings, etc. We call this special type of drone a “Flying User
Interface”, because it provides real-time augmented realitybased user interface while perched on any surface. A smartphone or any computing device can be used as the onboard
computer containing other devices such as accelerometer, gyroscope, compass, flashlight, microphone, speaker, etc.

there augment a user interface application by helping the user
learn dancing, games, music, cooking, navigation, etc. It can
be used as a display interface for the purpose of advertisement. For example we can deploy these devices in a jungle
or garden where these device(s) can hook or stick to rock or
tree trunk to provide navigation, especially during the night
or evening time. Device can be used with another drone or
devices to solve complex problems. For example, multiple
devices can be used to create a large display or panoramic
view. Or, if we have two devices along both side of a wall,
the system can be used to simulate a virtual window by projecting, processing and passing images to each other. The
device can be used to project information in difficult situations, such as in the bathroom during the shower, or in the
exploration of a dark cave (with simultaneous mapping, visualization, and navigation). More information about possible
applications can be found in US patent application [4]. This
work is in progress. You can read more information and get
updates about the project at http://flyinginterface.com.

Drone flies from one place to another, detects a surface, and
attaches itself to it. After successful attachment, the device
stops all its rotators and begins to project information on surfaces. This mechanism generates a stabilized projection irrespective of the user’s motion. The interface is also noiseless,
because the drone is now attached to a surface and no longer
requires flying to stay in the air. The drone can project clear
images and user-interfaces on many nearby surfaces using a
projector camera system. For example, when stuck to the ceiling it can project information on the floor and walls. Projector is attached to a small robotic arm that enables projection
of information in any direction using two or three degrees of
freedom, even on the same surface where device is attached.
In some embodiments, if a heavy projector is used, the projector can be attached to the main body or frame of the device, and a robotic arm with the help of mirrors can navigate
or change the direction of the projection or projected rays to
nearby surfaces. Projected user-interface may contain information about an object being augmented and/or information
from Internet. User can interact with the user-interface using
gestures from any part of body, such as feet, finger, hand, etc.

REFERENCES

1. Linder, N., and Maes, P. The design evolution of luminar:
A compact and kinetic projected augmented reality
interface. In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’12, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2012), 1435–1436.
2. Mistry, P., and Maes, P. Sixthsense: A wearable gestural
interface. In ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2009 Sketches,
SIGGRAPH ASIA ’09, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2009), 11:1–11:1.

APPLICATIONS

This system supports all types of applications supported by
previous projector camera systems and drone display systems
described in the prior art. For example it can find or detect
some hard surface such as paper or plastic sheets, stick to it,
and fly with it with a projected user interface.

3. Scheible, J., Hoth, A., Saal, J., and Su, H. Displaydrone:
A flying robot based interactive display. In Proceedings of
the 2Nd ACM International Symposium on Pervasive
Displays, PerDis ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2013),
49–54.

This system also has its own unique and interesting applications. For example it may stick to a nearby surface and from

4. Verma, P. Flying User Interface. US patent application
20160041628.

204

