OctaRing: Examining Pressure-Sensitive
Multi-Touch Input on a Finger Ring Device
Hyunchul Lim, Jungmin Chung, Changhoon Oh, SoHyun Park, Bongwon Suh
Human Centered Computing Lab
Seoul National University
{hyunchul, jungminchung, yurial, sohyun, bongwon}@snu.ac.kr
ABSTRACT

In this paper, we introduce OctaRing, an octagon-shaped
finger ring device that facilitates pressure-sensitive multitouch gestures. To explore the feasibility of its prototype, we
conducted an experiment and investigated users’
sensorimotor skills in exerting different levels of pressure on
the ring with more than one finger. The results of the
experiment indicate that users are comfortable with the twofinger touch configuration with two levels of pressure. Based
on this result, future work will explore novel gestures
involving a finger ring device.

Figure 1. OctaRing: (a) the concept design and (b) the prototype.
[1], we examined users’ sensorimotor skills in controlling
pressure levels when manipulating the ring without any
feedback. Our results show that users felt comfortable using
two-finger pressure-sensitive touch input with two levels of
pressure. We see our work as an early effort in designing
better pressure-sensitive multi-touch techniques for ring
devices.

Author Keywords

Ring; pressure-sensitive; multi-touch; wearable;
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.

OCTARING

In designing a pressure-sensitive multi-touch interface with
a finger ring device, we considered the design issues of ring
shape and touch configuration. A pilot study was used to
experientially determine our design space (two males and
two females, aged between 26 and 31 years). Based on
participants’ input, we developed an octagon-shaped ring
prototype and identified multi-touch gesture types.

INTRODUCTION

Recently, researchers in human–computer interaction have
been exploring an array of finger ring devices for input
control as a paired input device with personal computers [2].
In addition to pointing and gesturing, touching a ring device
is a common input action. However, even though users can
simultaneously manipulate a ring device with more than one
finger, the application of touch techniques has been limited
to simpler actions, such as binary signals (e.g., clicking) [2].

Ring Shape

To provide a natural tactile feedback for multi-touch gestures
such as sliding and pinching, we designed a polygon-shaped
ring device, as opposed to a circular one. Participants were
asked to wear three types of polygon-shaped rings (hexagon,
octagon, and decagon) on their index fingers, and they then
performed multi-touch gestures, such as pinching. After the
session, we asked them to describe their experiences with
each ring type.

To address this issue, we explore multi-finger touch
techniques with a finger ring device for more diverse touch
inputs. We employ finger pressure as an additional input
source, which can fine-tune multi-touch gestures made on a
ring device.
In this paper, we present OctaRing, an octagon-shaped finger
ring device that facilitates pressure-sensitive multi-touch
gestures. With the prototype, we conducted an experiment to
study how many fingers users can be used, and how many
pressure levels can be distinguished. Inspired by Rendl et al.

The study revealed that the octagon-shaped ring was most
suitable for participants to naturally perform multi-touch
gestures. Participants reported that the size of each side of
the ring mattered. They found it difficult to grab the sides of
the hexagon-shaped ring with more than three fingers. On the
other hand, the sides of the decagon-shaped ring were too
small for a participant to gesture on. We therefore decided to
use the octagon-shaped ring, called OctaRing, to investigate
multi-touch input techniques on a finger ring device.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2984780

Touch Configuration

In the pilot study, we were able to observe many ways in
which users can interact with polygon-shaped ring devices
(Figure 2).

223

Five Touch Configurations

Type
2L
Accuracy

Figure 2. Five touch configurations: (a) one finger, (b)
two finger (together), (c) two finger (apart), (d) three
finger, and (e) four finger.

3L
User
Rating

Implementation

An OctaRing prototype was implemented using pressure
sensors to detect pressure-sensitive multi-touch. As shown in
Figure 1(b), a force sensor resistor (Interlink FSR-400) is
attached to each side of the ring. The sensor can recognize
0.2-20N, and its outputs were sampled at 100 Hz using an 8bit analog-digital Arduino convertor.

2L
3L

(a)
100

(b)
100

(c)
96.3

(d)
96.3

(e)
85.2

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.24)

85.2

85.2

96.3

63.0

44.4

(0.24)

(0.18)

(0.11)

(0.35)

(0.37)

1.13

2.63

1

3.63

4.50

(0.35)

(0.52)

(0.00)

(0.92)

(0.76)

2.13

3.63

2.00

4.63

5.00

(0.83)

(0.92)

(0.76)

(0.74)

(0.00)

Table 1. Summary of results: the accuracy rates (%) and user
ratings (SD in parentheses; 1 = easiest, 5 = most difficult) on each
of the five touch configurations at 2L (2-level) and 3L (3-level).

conditions, all participants chose 2-level, two-finger (apart)
touch (Figure 2(c)) as the easiest.

EXPERIMENT

We performed a user study to investigate the feasibility of
our ring design. To evaluate the effectiveness of interaction
with the pressure-sensitive ring device, we measured
interaction accuracy and user rating for varying pressure
levels and touch configurations.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Overall the octagon-shaped ring, OctaRing, could facilitate
pressure-sensitive multi-finger touch techniques for a diverse
array of gestures. This suggests that polygon-shaped rings
could help 1) give distinct tactile feedback naturally when
users perform multi-touch gestures such as pinching, and 2)
accurately detect how many fingers are being touched on the
sides of the ring. In particular, an octagon-shaped finger ring
is optimal for matching users’ finger sizes.

Procedures: We used a 2 × 5 within-subjects factorial design
with different pressure levels (2-level with light-strong
pressure, and 3-level with light-medium-strong pressure),
five touch configurations, and three repetitions. We had nine
participants (four females, aged 24–32), and thus a total of
270 (30 × 9) trial data were collected.

We found that users performed well when using two fingers
with 2-level pressure. Despite the subjective difficulties in
controlling 3-level pressure, we observed that 3-level
pressure-sensitive touch input has potential when using one
and two fingers. In addition, when using two fingers to
perform pressure-sensitive input, we found that the distance
between two fingers is important. Even though users
achieved high control accuracy with the two fingers, they
performed slightly better and felt more comfortable when
their two fingers were apart rather than together. We believe
that the gesture of holding the ring with their fingers facing
each other should be considered first in the design of
pressure-sensitive ring interfaces.

As shown in Rendl et al. [1], measuring the accuracy of
gestures with pressure-sensitive devices cannot use a singlepressure threshold value because pressure perception is user
dependent and finger dependent. To calculate accuracy, we
used different thresholds for each participant’s fingers. After
each session, we manually judged the accuracy of the applied
pressure level of the given gestures by observing the explicit
differences between pressure levels. In addition, we asked
the participants to rate the difficulty of each condition
according to a 5-point Likert scale.
Results: Table 1 shows the accuracy and user rating results.
Participants performed interactions more accurately with the
2-level pressure than the 3-level pressure (F1,8 = 11.83, p
= .008). We also found a significant two-way interaction
between pressure levels and touch configurations (F4,32 =
10.72, p < .001), indicating that touch configuration affects
accuracy differently at each pressure level. With 3-level
pressure, participants achieved low accuracy when
interacting with more than three fingers.

In this research, we focused on low-level gestures. Further
research is required to apply the proposed gestures to highlevel interactions with paired devices in diverse contexts. We
hope this research can inform the design of interactions with
finger ring devices.
REFERENCES

1. Rendl, C., Greindl, P., Probst, K., Behrens, M., and
Haller, M. (2014) Presstures: exploring pressuresensitive multi-touch gestures on trackpads. In Proc.
CHI 2014, 431-434.

User ratings showed noticeable differences in both pressure
levels (F1,8 = 25.29, p = .001) and touch configurations (F4,32
= 119.5, p < .001). Post hoc analysis shows that one-finger
touch as well as two-finger (apart) touch (Figure 2(c)) was
relatively easier than three- and four-finger touch (p < .001).
The result also shows that controlling 3-level pressure was
more difficult than the other. From among the 10 experiment

2. Shilkrot, R., Huber, J., Steimle, J., Nanayakkara, S., and
Maes, P. (2015) Digital Digits: A Comprehensive
Survey of Finger Augmentation Devices. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 48(2), 30.

224

