Luminescent Tentacles: A Scalable SMA Motion Display
Akira Nakayasu
Kanazawa College of Art
5-11-1 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan
akira@nakayasu.com
ABSTRACT

The Luminescent Tentacles system is a scalable kinetic
surface system for kinetic art, ambient display, and
animatronics. The 256 shape-memory alloy actuators react to
hand movement by fluid dynamics and Kinect. These
actuators behave like waving tentacles of sea anemones
under the sea, and the top of the actuator softly glows like a
bioluminescent organism. To precisely control a large
number of actuators simultaneously, the system utilizes one
microcontroller per actuator for distributed processing. In
addition, it provides a scalable platform, which can be easily
built into various forms.
Author Keywords

Figure 1. Luminescent Tentacles system.

Kinetic surface; actuated surface; shape-memory alloy; soft
actuator; smart material interface
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. Information interfaces and presentation: User
interfaces
INTRODUCTION

Inspired by waving tentacles of sea anemones or grasses
being blown by wind, we proposed a shape-memory alloy
(SMA) motion display [6]. Our previous works [7, 8]
introduced a control method for various motions of an SMA
actuator that can bend in multiple directions. Whereas
several research works similar to our idea have been
conducted, most of these systems provide awkward motion
of actuators or have a small number of actuators. The goal of
the present research is to realize a fantastic scene similar to
the waving tentacles of sea anemones under the sea. Its
applications include kinetic art, ambient display, and
animatronics. To engage users in a high level of expression,
we explored a control method for smooth motion of an SMA
actuator and for aesthetic kinetic representation. In the
present paper, we describe a new firmware of
microcontroller for distributed processing to provide a
scalable platform with a large number of actuators and an
application example to react like a water ripple.

Figure 2. SMA actuators reacting to a hand movement in the
dark.
RELATED WORK

Public Anemone in the interactive robot theatre [1] is a
robotic creature with a sea anemone motif, but it has only
four tentacles. The Luminescent Tentacles system (Fig. 1)
mimics a long-tentacle anemone with a large number of
tentacles. Some haptic interfaces [2, 3, 11] have kinetic
components. However, the actuator of these systems is
unlike the tentacle of a sea anemone that can softly bend in
multiple directions. Soft-robotic researchers create various
types of bioinspired actuators [4, 5]. These actuators include
the abilities to deform their shapes to accomplish some types
of complex motion. However, these studies do not focus on
a kinetic representation using a collection of actuators but
focus on a single actuator only. Hairlytop [9, 10] is a scalable
haptic interface consisting of SMA actuator units. It closely
resembles our research and the design of our actuator, but the
actuator motion is awkward. In contrast, our system can
precisely perform control using distributed processing;
therefore, it is appropriate for a kinetic representation using
a large number of actuators.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985695

33

the sample angle and strength data from the result of the fluid
simulation are transmitted to the PIC. By waving a hand
above the tentacle units, each actuator moves in the direction
of the wave propagation similar to sea anemones under the
sea (Fig. 2). The sound reaction to the hand movement
creates music via a software synthesizer.

IMPLEMENTATION
Hardware and Firmware

The Luminescent Tentacles system is composed of tentacle
units (Fig. 3). The current setup has an array of 256 tentacle
units built into a square aluminum frame (45 cm2). The
tentacle units are composed of an SMA actuator and a control
circuit that we developed, and they are spaced 26 mm apart
from each other. The SMA actuator has a simple structure: a
silicon tube (5 mm in diameter and 80-mm long), three
BioMetal Fibers (BMF150, developed by TOKI
Corporation), a white LED chip, and a diffuser cap. Each
SMA actuator is actuated by a BioMetal Fiber, a thin SMA
wire, which contracts when heated and expands to its original
length by cooling. The heat of each BioMetal Fiber is
controlled through pulse-width modulation (PWM) control
currents. The actuator can bend in six directions by the
combination of three PWM control currents [8]. The top of
the actuator softly glows like a bioluminescent organism.
The PWM control currents are produced by a control circuit
composed of a peripheral interface controller (PIC), a fieldeffect transistor, and some electrical parts. In addition, to
communicate with the PC application, our system adopts the
DMX512, a serial communication protocol developed to
control stage lighting, which supports a daisy chain. In our
previous works [6–8], all the current changes at a certain time
were calculated by the PC application, and the control circuit
only worked as the interface for the DMX512 to control the
current. A smooth controller system needs to precisely
control a large number of current channels at the same time.
Our present system needs to simultaneously control 1024
channels (three SMA channels and one LED channel per
actuator). However, our previous method creates a high CPU
load or high traffic and often loses data. Therefore, we
improved our previous PIC firmware. The current changes
are processed on the PIC, and the PC application only
transmits the trigger data. Therefore, our system with a
certain number of PICs can reduce the load during processing.
Furthermore, the distributed processing system with the
DMX512 creates a scalable platform, which can be easily
built into various forms.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The Luminescent Tentacles system is still at an early stage
of development, and many challenges need to be addressed.
We plan to build a colored wave using RGB LEDs, a sound
visualizer to follow the tentacle dance, and a haptic interface
with a touch sensor. In addition, we envision an animatronics
work with a three-dimensional form.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI 26330418.
REFERENCES

1. Breazeal, C., Brooks, A., Gray, J., Hancher, M.,
McBean, J., Stiehl, D and Strickon, J. Interactive robot
theatre. Communications of the ACM, 46(7), ACM, 7685, 2003.
2. Coelho, M. and Maes, P. Sprout I/O: A texturally rich
interface. In Proc. TEI ’08, ACM, 221-222, 2008.
3. Kamiyama, Y., Mutou, Y., Sakata, G. and Yamanaka, S.
Cilium: Robotic Interface based on Microscopic Hairs.
http://www.diginfo.tv/v/11-0093-d-en.php.
4. Kim, S., Laschi, C. and Trimmer, B. Soft robotics: A
bioinspired evolution in robotics. Trends in
Biotechnology, 31(5), Cell Press, 287-294, 2013.
5. Martinez, R.V., Branch, J.L., Fish, C.R., Jin, L.
Shepherd, R.F., Nunes, R.M.D., Suo, Z. and Whitesides,
G.M. Robotic tentacles with three-dimensional mobility
based on flexible elastomers. Advanced Materials,
25(2), Wiley-VCH, 205-212, 2013.
6. Nakayasu, A. Himawari: Shape memory alloy motion
display for robotic representation. In Proc. CHI ’10
Extended Abstracts, ACM, 2010.
7. Nakayasu, A. Waving Tentacles: A system and method
for controlling a SMA actuator. In Proc.
SIGGRAPH ’14 Posters, ACM, 2014.
8. Nakayasu, A. Waving Tentacles 8 × 8: Controlling a
SMA actuator by optical flow. In Proc. SIGGRAPH
ASIA ’15 Posters, ACM, 2015.

Figure 3. Tentacle unit composed of an SMA actuator and a
control circuit.

9. Ooide, Y., Kawaguchi, H. and Nojima, T. An assembly
of soft actuators for an organic user interface. In Proc.
UIST ’13 Posters, ACM, 87-88, 2013.

Application: Interaction by Fluid Dynamics

The control circuit that we developed interacts with
applications that support the DMX512, and we selected
openFrameworks, which is an open-source development
environment with many powerful libraries, including
ofxDmx and ofxKinect. The sample application that interacts
with fluid dynamics utilizes Kinect to detect hand movement
and ofxFlowTools, a third-party library of openFrameworks,
for fluid simulation. The trigger data that are calculated by

10. Umezu, S., Ohkubo, M., Ooide, Y. and Nojima, T.
Hairlytop interface: A basic tool for active interfacing.
In Proc. UIST 2014 Posters, ACM, 95-96, 2014.
11. Raffle, H., Joachim, M.W. and Tichenor, J. Super cilia
skin: An interactive membrane. In Ext. Abstracts
CHI ’03, ACM, 808-809, 2003.

34

