Gushed Diffusers:
Fast-moving, Floating, and Lightweight Midair Display
Ippei Suzuki1∗ Shuntarou Yoshimitsu2
Keisuke Kawahara1
Nobutaka Ito3
1
1
3
Atsushi Shinoda
Akira Ishii
Takatoshi Yoshida
Yoichi Ochiai1
1
2
3
University of Tsukuba Waseda University The University of Tokyo
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a)(b) Wearable usage as an application example of our system. (c) Showing a dolphin. (d) We employ aerosol distribution from off-the-shelf
spray as a fog screen.

generated by fog machine. Han and Perlin [1] use dust-like
particles. Tanikawa and Suzuki [3] use falling water drops.
These studies aimed to realize large, and long time projection. However, their system can not be installed on drone or
wearable usage and used in moving situation because they
tend to be large and heavy.

ABSTRACT

We present a novel method for fast-moving aerial imaging
using aerosol-based fog screens. Conventional systems of
aerial imaging cannot move fast because they need large and
heavy setup. In this study, we propose to add new tradeoffs between limited display time and payloads. This system
employ aerosol distribution from off-the-shelf spray as a fog
screen that can resist the wind, and have high portability. As
application examples, we present wearable application and
aerial imaging on objects with high speed movements such
as a drone, a radio-controlled model car, and performers. We
believe that our study contribute to the exploration of new
application areas for fog displays and expand expressions of
entertainments and interactivity.

In this paper, we employ aerosol distribution from the offthe-shelf spray as diffusers (Figure 1 (c)(d)). We propose to
add new tradeoffs between limited display time and payloads.
Using aerosol distribution from spray has two merits.
• Because of its high distribution speed, the system and projected image can be moved, and has high wind-tolerance.
• We enable the whole system to be lightweight and compact
because our system consists of several small components.

Author Keywords

Display; fog screen; multicopter; entertainment;
communication.

Furthermore, we present applications that utilize benefits
of our aerosol-based display: high refresh rate (approximately raise time 0.5 s, disappearance 0.4 s), small size and
lightweight (approximately 600 g all package), high tolerance
for wind (approximately 10 m/s).

ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.1. Information Interfaces and Presentation: Multimedia
Information Systems

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

INTRODUCTION

Figure 2 (left) illustrates the overview of our basic setup system and data-flow diagram. This setup includes the off-theshelf aerosol spray, the laser portable-projector, servomotors
for operating the spray, embedded computers, a mirror controlled by the servomotor, a battery, and a frame on which
these components are mounted. The minimum weight of
whole system is around 600 g (when we use balsa woods for
frames). The frames of our display systems were fabricated
with a laser cutter. Assembled system of basic setup is shown
in Figure 2 (middle). System setup is changed depending on
the application.

Numerous approaches of midair image-projection have been
investigated. In these techniques, the screen is usually filled
with small objects of a material that can passively reflect projected or environmental light. The fog screen [2] uses fog
∗

1heisuzuki@gmail.com

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985706

Aerosol spray: An off-the-shelf aerosol spray which aims at
cooling human’s body is used as a projection medium in our
basic setup. It consists of isopentane (47 ml) and liquefied

69

⑥Mirror

⑦
⑥Mirror

①Spray

③Laser projector
Video signal

⑦Servo

④Raspberry Pi

②Servo

Nozzle Actuator

USB serial
Pin conector

⑤Arduino

④Raspberry Pi

Pin conector

①Spray

②Servo

③Projector
⑤Arduino

Figure 2. Left: System overview and data-flow diagram. Middle: System appearance of our basic setup (acrylic plates version). These parts were
formed with a laser cutter. Right: Application example - a radio-controlled model car with our system.

Figure 3. Floating screen with projection (showing a morpho butterfly) under the drone (DJI Phantom 2; DJI Co., Ltd.).

petroleum gas (LPG). Because these are high-volatility ingredients, they do not remain on surfaces of objects like floors or
walls. Many typical off-the-shelf sprays like antiperspirant
sprays tend to include many ingredients and additives. Some
of these ingredients remain on surfaces of objects and complicate the cleanup after using the system. Because audiences
will experience unpleasant sensations in such case, we employ the spray for cooling human’s body.

as a wearable display, however, it is too heavy to wear the
display, and the results will be unsatisfactory. For another
wearable example, we can communicate visually with other
people using our system. People can project aerial images
over their heads and communicate by using these images in
the real world with others as shown in Figure 1 (a)(b). In a
television program like a quiz-show, people can express their
wonder with an overhead exclamation point image that is produced by our system. Conventional similar systems use only
sound or fastened screens to express feelings. In contrast, we
can send both various visual and audible messages. Therefore, we can evolve styles of communication in the real world.

Spray actuator: Two servomotors are used to gush aerosol
out automatically with a plate to push the spray nozzle. They
are fixed on each side of the spray on the frame. The plate
made of acrylic board is designed to push the nozzle down
by fitting the form of the nozzle. This part is designed to be
removable from the assembled state of whole system. Therefore, we can exchange the spray quickly and easily.

DISCUSSION

The aerosol may get into a persons eyes or mouth directly depending on the style of use. In addition, the environmental
impact of the system should be considered. Another problem
regarding safety is that the spray is flammable. If our system is used in a fire scene, the spray could ignite or cause an
explosion. Moreover, careful attention should be taken when
using the system with real fire of stage effects, such as a flame
machine.

APPLICATIONS

Floating or fast moving midair display: We fabricated a
prototype of the application installed on a drone, as shown in
Figure 3. The system can be installed on a small drone easily
because the weight of our system is around 600 g at the smallest including all components. Drone can compensate for the
narrow viewpoint of our system by adjusting angles of display because the drone can move in any direction and rotate
in the horizontal plane. If the drone is controlled depending
on the position of observers, they can always see an image.
Further, we also can install our system on a radio-controlled
model car, as shown in Figure 2 (right). We can show an
aerial image instantly by using our system. This will attract
the attention of the viewers.

REFERENCES

1. Han, J., and Perlin, K. Volumetric display with dust as the
participating medium, June 24 2004. WO Patent App.
PCT/US2003/038,976.
2. Rakkolainen, I., DiVerdi, S., Olwal, A., Candussi, N.,
Hüllerer, T., Laitinen, M., Piirto, M., and Palovuori, K.
The interactive fogscreen. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005
Emerging Technologies, SIGGRAPH ’05, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2005).

Wearable use and user interaction: We present wearable
uses of our system as a proof of concept on advantages of the
movability and lightweight. For the first example, we present
entertainment uses. Our system could be installed on the back
of the performer. If we use a conventional fog screen, the performer can not move swiftly, as it cause air movement which
can distort the fog screen. A large 2D display may be used

3. Tanikawa, T., and Suzuki, Y. Display composed of water
drops for filling space with materialized virtual
three-dimensional objects. In Virtual Reality Conference,
2006 (March 2006), 159–166.

70

