SoEs: Attachable Augmented Haptic on Gaming Controller
for Immersive Interaction
Kong-Chang Lee
Ping-Hsuan Han*
Jui-Chun Hsiao*
‡
*
Chien-Hsing Chou
Kuan-Yin Lu
Yi-Ping Hung*
*
National Taiwan University
‡
Tamkang University
{yeti0193275, pinghsuan.han}@gmail.com
hung@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Yang-Sheng Chen*
Chiao-En Hsieh*

‡

Figure 1. Scenarios of multisensory interactive gameplay through immersive gaming controller
ABSTRACT

To provide a various and low-cost haptic feedback device
for game makers, many works have influenced our
prototyping. Birdly [1] creates a vivid full-body experience
of flying by using a motion platform and a wind-feedback
system. Like most of motion platform, they could provide a
whole body haptic experience, but the device is expensive.
Haptic Turk [2] is another kind of motion platform based on
few people, which do not have any cost for machinery, but
it could provide similar experiences of haptic feedback.
Although these approach have been successful at whole
body haptic experience, however, they are not suitable for
recreating the touch-related experience.
Therefore, prop-based feedback system could consider
another usage. Annexing Reality [3] and Haptic Retargeting
[4] provide a prop-based feedback for virtual object. Both
design only provide a static tangible interface for user
which use real physical object to simulate the tactile
sensation of the virtual object. Additionally, OoEs [5] uses
an orb-form feedback system which could provide four
kinds of active tactile sensation to simulate nature element
in the immersive game. Those works make prop-based
approaches very stationary and not universally usable.
TurkDeck [6] have shown another potential approach by
scaling prop-based virtual reality through physical labor.
This make prop-based tactile sensation more useful, which
it is fun and interesting that having a group of people for
doing this. Lopes et al. [7] proposed Impacto which uses a
wearable device to simulate the physical impact by
combing tactile stimulation with electrical muscle
stimulation. Po2 [8] uses gloves to provide an illusion
tactile feedback between hands. Although both wearable
devices can provide augmented haptic in the immersive
virtual reality, player has to wear something which is not
usually wear it.

We present SoEs (Sword of Elements), an attachable
augmented haptic device for enhancing gaming controller
in the immersive first-person game. Generally, Player can
easily receive visual and auditory feedback through headmounted displays (HMD) and headphones from first-person
perspective in virtual world. However, the tactile feedback
is less than those feedbacks in immersive environment.
Although gaming controller, i.e. VIVE or Oculus controller,
can provide tactile feedback by some vibration sensors, the
haptic feedback is more complicated and various, it
includes kinesthesia and cutaneous feedback. Our key idea
is to provide a low-cost approach to simulate the haptic
feedback of player manipulation in the immersive
environment such as striking while the iron is hot which the
player could feel the heat and reaction force. Eventually,
the game makers could utilize the attachable device into
their games for providing haptic feedback.
Author Keywords

Augmented Haptic; Haptic Feedback; Immersive Game;
Game Controller; Virtual Reality.
INTRODUCTION

Virtual Reality (VR) is an emerging field due to its
powerful immersive feeling. To enhance the player
experience in immersive game in the state of art, haptic
feedback is one of the key feedback.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
UIST'16 Adjunct, October 16-19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan
ACM 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/1