M.Sketch: Prototyping Tool for
Linkage-Based Mechanism Design
Han-Jong Kim, Yunwoo Jeong, Ju-Whan Kim, Tek-Jin Nam
Department of Industrial Design, KAIST
291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
jong2jong2@kaist.ac.kr, nnitgd@kaist.ac.kr, juwhan.k@gmail.com, tjnam@kaist.ac.kr
ABSTRACT

We present M.Sketch, a prototyping tool to support
non-experts in designing and building a linkage-based
mechanism. It enables users to rapidly create the mechanism
by blending bottom-up (drawing linkages) and top-down
(optimizing movement path) approaches. The resulting
movement can be reviewed on the fly in a 3D space. Functions
for digital fabrication with laser cutting and modular kits
allow users to easily and effectively transform the designed
mechanism into a physical model. M.Sketch can be used
for technical non-experts to prototype initial models of smart
product, robots, toys, and kinetic sculptures.

Figure 1. Snapshot of M.Sketch: illustrating mechanism drawing and
movement path of a flapping wing.

Author Keywords

needed. In addition, specialized tools such as Linkage [5]
and SAM [9] exist for mechanism design. They focus on
analyzing mechanical movement but do not support digital
fabrication. Furthermore, several top-down design methods
for generating mechanisms from certain motion input have
been introduced [1, 3, 4, 6, 11]. These works are different
from our tool, as they focus on algorithms and frameworks
for mechanism generation instead of supporting practical
prototyping. FoldMecha has demonstrated the automatic
generation of a paper mechanism based on a parametric
design approach for two specific examples [8]. Our work
is distinct from the previous works because we aim to develop
a readily usable tool for designing and building arbitrary types
of linkage-based mechanism prototypes.

Mechanism design; linkage-based mechanism; prototyping
tool; computational design; digital fabrication
ACM Classification Keywords

H.5.2. User Interfaces: Prototyping
INTRODUCTION

Linkage-based mechanisms are commonly used by makers
to build interactive robots, toys, kinetic sculptures, and
smart products. Although linkage-based mechanisms consist
of simple connections of links by joints, it is challenging
for non-experts without engineering knowledge and skill to
generate a desired movement. Thus, it is important to provide
easy and rapid design aid to sketch, simulate, and build
mechanisms.

M.SKETCH

An iterative design and refinement with trials and errors are
essential to reach a mechanism with a desired movement.
This often requires the creation of a physical model after an
initial conceptual design process. Although several fabrication
systems [2, 7, 12] have been introduced, they have focused on
building static models.

We present M.Sketch, a prototyping tool that supports
non-experts to rapidly sketch, simulate a linkage-based
mechanism, and transform it into a physical prototype
(Figure 1). It provides intuitive interfaces for novice
users without engineering knowledge and skills. M.Sketch
has been developed as a Web-based computational
design tool that is freely available on a public domain
(http://cidr.kaist.ac.kr/msketch).
It offers high device
compatibility for PCs, tablets, and other mobile devices. Its
key features include both movement simulation of the created
mechanism and support for effective physical modeling.

Engineering CAD tools can be used to design and simulate a
mechanism. However, they are inefficient for early exploration
of a desired movement, as sophisticated 3D modeling is

Sketching A Moving Mechanism

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must
be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). Copyright is held by the
author/owner(s).
UIST’16 Adjunct, October 16–19, 2016, Tokyo, Japan.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-4531-6/16/10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2984751.2985709

M.Sketch supports the rapid design of linkage-based
mechanisms. There are three ways to design mechanisms
using M.Sketch. First, it applies sketching linkage geometries
as a bottom-up approach. Novice users can easily design
mechanisms by drawing and connecting geometries with

75

Figure 2. Sketching, simulating, and building a mechanism with M.Sketch: (a) sketching linkages and attaching motor to view a movement path, (b)
optimizing the current path to a desired path, (c) checking the estimation of a path instantly, (d) setting the types and parameters of motors, and (e)
building a physical model with laser-cut parts or Science Box.

dragging and snapping joints (Figure 2a). This method
can generate arbitrary and complex mechanisms by drawing
simple lines and connecting them. Second, the software
enables the top-down adaptation of mechanisms to the desired
path. When the user draws a desired path at a certain point, the
system compares the desired and the current paths to derive
the optimized positions of linkages using a gradient-descent
algorithm (Figure 2b). Last, it provides various mechanism
presets, such as 4-bar linkage, Jansen, Klann, and scissors
mechanisms. Using the provided preset examples, a user can
rapidly create similar linkage-based mechanisms.

interface. To show the rapid process of building a physical
model, we plan to install a paper-cutting machine for building
physical models on site. The paper prototypes can be used
as souvenirs. We also plan to exhibit a few high-quality,
interactive kinetic devices designed and built by M.Sketch
to show the capacity and feasibility of the system (Figure 3).

Visualizing and Analyzing Movement

M.Sketch visualizes the expected motion paths of certain
points of a mechanism when rotary motors are assigned to the
joint of a linkage. When the user edits a linkage position, the
expected paths are instantly changed (Figure 2c). The motion
of a mechanism is influenced by different types of motors
(DC or servo) as well as associated parameters, including
speed, direction, and angle ranges (Figure 2d). Animated
motion with assigned motors can be checked in a 3D view
while using simulation. Multiple planar mechanisms can be
located in 3D space to represent comprehensive movement.
Additionally, M.Sketch provides a basic analysis of a path.
When the user creates a walking mechanism such as a Jansen
or Klann mechanism, it is possible to analyze the width and
angle coefficient of the stride of the leg.

Figure 3. Example physical models designed by M.Sketch: (a) walking
robot, (b) kinetic sculpture, and (c) drawing machine.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

M.Sketch is a prototyping tool for non-experts to design
and test linkage-based mechanisms. It can be used for
early prototyping of smart products, robots, toys, and kinetic
sculptures. For more comprehensive expression of mechanical
movement, we plan to add more mechanical components
beyond linkages, such as sliders, gears, cams, racks and
pinions. We plan to further revise the top-down design
approach using advanced optimization algorithms. As a
result, it will be possible for non-experts to sketch more
complex movement paths to generate associated mechanisms
by M.Sketch. The planar mechanism will be extended to 3D.
For the efficient assembly of physical linkages, support for 3D
printing techniques with customized shape and joint structures
will be adopted.

Supporting Fabrication

M.Sketch supports building a physical prototype after virtual
mechanism design. The designed linkages can be exported
as a vector drawing to be used for the cutting of paper,
wood, or plastic. A physical model can be easily made by
assembling linkages (Figure 2e). Another method of a creating
physical model is to use Science Box, one of the most popular
commercial modular kits in Korea [10]. Science Box’s rigid
steel plates have holes to be assembled. M.Sketch provides
snap and length-conversion functions for the length unit of
Science Box. It is possible to build a hybrid physical prototype
with paper or acrylic as well as parts from Science Box.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
DEMO AND APPLICATIONS

This research was supported by the EDISON Program through
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded
by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (No.
2014M3C1A6038802).

Our demonstration allows participants to rapidly sketch and
build a linkage-based moving mechanism. We plan to use
several tablet PCs and laptops to demonstrate the M.Sketch

76

Animation, SCA ’14, Eurographics Association
(Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland, 2014), 123–130.

REFERENCES

1. Bächer, M., Coros, S., and Thomaszewski, B. Linkedit:
Interactive linkage editing using symbolic kinematics.
ACM Trans. Graph. 34, 4 (July 2015), 99:1–99:8.

7. Mueller, S., Mohr, T., Guenther, K., Frohnhofen, J., and
Baudisch, P. fabrickation: Fast 3d printing of functional
objects by integrating construction kit building blocks. In
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’14, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 2014), 3827–3834.

2. Beyer, D., Gurevich, S., Mueller, S., Chen, H.-T., and
Baudisch, P. Platener: Low-fidelity fabrication of 3d
objects by substituting 3d print with laser-cut plates. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’15, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 2015), 1799–1806.

8. Oh, H., Gross, M. D., and Eisenberg, M. Foldmecha:
Design for linkage-based paper toys. In Adjunct
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software & Technology, UIST ’15 Adjunct,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2015), 91–92.

3. Ceylan, D., Li, W., Mitra, N. J., Agrawala, M., and Pauly,
M. Designing and fabricating mechanical automata from
mocap sequences. ACM Trans. Graph. 32, 6 (Nov. 2013),
186:1–186:11.

9. SAM Mechanism Design Software.
http://www.artas.nl/en.

4. Coros, S., Thomaszewski, B., Noris, G., Sueda, S.,
Forberg, M., Sumner, R. W., Matusik, W., and Bickel, B.
Computational design of mechanical characters. ACM
Trans. Graph. 32, 4 (July 2013), 83:1–83:12.

10. Science Box. http://www.jeilscience.co.kr.
11. Thomaszewski, B., Coros, S., Gauge, D., Megaro, V.,
Grinspun, E., and Gross, M. Computational design of
linkage-based characters. ACM Trans. Graph. 33, 4 (July
2014), 64:1–64:9.

5. Linkage Mechanism Designer and Simulator.
http://blog.rectorsquid.com/
linkage-mechanism-designer-and-simulator.

12. Weichel, C., Lau, M., Kim, D., Villar, N., and Gellersen,
H. W. Mixfab: A mixed-reality environment for personal
fabrication. In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’14, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 3855–3864.

6. Megaro, V., Thomaszewski, B., Gauge, D., Grinspun, E.,
Coros, S., and Gross, M. Chacra: An interactive design
system for rapid character crafting. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer

77

