CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

PossessedHand: Techniques for Controlling Human Hands
using Electrical Muscles Stimuli
Emi Tamaki
Graduate school of
Interdisciplinary
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo.
hoimei@acm.org

Takashi Miyaki∗
Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo.
miyaki@acm.org

Jun Rekimoto
Interfaculty Initiative in
Information Studies,
The University of Tokyo.
Sony Computer Science
Laboratories, Inc.
rekimoto@acm.org

ABSTRACT

If a device can control human hands, the device can be useful for HCI and tangible application’s output. To aid the
controlling of finger movement, we present PossessedHand,
a device with a forearm belt that can inform when and which
fingers should be moved. PossessedHand controls the user’s
fingers by applying electrical stimulus to the muscles around
the forearm. Each muscle is stimulated via 28 electrode
pads. Muscles at different depths in the forearm can be selected for simulation by varying the stimulation level. PossessedHand can automatically calibrate the system for individuals. The automatic calibration system estimates relations between each electrode pad, stimulation level and muscle movement. Experiments show that PossessedHand can
control the motion of 16 joints in the hand. Further, we also
discuss an application based on this device to aid in playing
a musical instrument.
Author Keywords

EMS, FES, Electric Stimulation, Hand Gesture, Musical Performance

Figure 1. Our concept. PossessedHand controls user’s finger.

ACM Classification Keywords

a device can control human hands, the device would lead the
next generation of HCI and tangle applications.

H.5 Information interfaces and presentation: [HCI]
General Terms

In this paper, we introduce PossessedHand, a device with a
forearm belt (Figure. 1) that can control several hand gestures and inform their timing; this device achieves this by
providing electrical stimulus to the muscles in the forearm.
However, a controlling the muscles requires special knowledge for the system setting because positions of the stimulation, the stimulation level and timing differ greatly in individuals. We also introduce an automatic calibration system
of PossessedHand. On this calibration system, user can use
PossessedHand without any special knowledge. Finally, we
discuss applications of PossessedHand.

Design, Experimentation, Human Factors
INTRODUCTION

HCI and tangible devices use many actuators as outputs. On
the other hand, human beings have many actuators such as
their muscles in their body. In particular, human hands have
the dexterous fingers which are used to output for communications, playing, touching and so on. However, human actuators have not been adapted to HCI and tangible devices. If
∗

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.(Author’s current affiliation)

RELATED WORK

Many devices and systems that directly stimulate a user’s
fingers have been researched [14, 16]. However, users prefer to avoid wearing devices on area A, shown in Figure. 2,
because this area is used to touch, hold, and pinch real objects. The skin on this area is important sensor for communication, touching, playing musical instruments or in other

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2011, May 7–12, 2011, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0267-8/11/05...$10.00.

543

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

We presented a designe of PossessedHand[28]. The paper
shows that PossessedHand needs seven electrodes to control 16 finger joint angles of user’s hand. Electrode pads,
which is noninvasive electrodes, are set on user’s forearm.
However, a location setting of the pas took many time and
required knowledges about muscle locations in forearm. We
must make a personal belt for each user because the size
of user’s forearm differs widely in individuals. For widely
uses, PossessedHand should have automatically calibration
system.

Figure 2. Area A: This area is involved in pinching, gripping, and holding motions. Area B: Electrical stimuli are provided to this area.

PHASE OF DEVELOPMENT

There are four phases to control hand gestures as outputs
of HCI and tangible applications. The applications are suggested on each phases. In this research, we identify three
phases in which PossessedHand can be used.

performing arts. Glove-type devices that dynamically and
mechanically control a user’s hand are available [29]. Such
devices cover most of area A. Although a device that can be
worn on the forearm has been developed, it is too large to be
comfortably used for daily uses.
To solve these problems, we develop a small device, PossessedHand, that can control a user’s hand without covering
area A. PossessedHand can be used for controlling fingerjoint movements; it operates by applying an electrical stimulus to the muscles in the forearm with noninvasive electrode
pads. The muscles involved in finger motions are clustered
in the forearm [23]. PossessedHand has electrode pads that
are fastened to the forearm to stimulate these muscles. The
tendons that are connected to the muscles move the finger
joints. To date, there have been no research on controlling
the position of the hand solely through electrical stimulation
to the forearm. The electrical stimulation by PossessedHand
is similar to Electrical Muscle Stimulation(EMS) [5, 6, 11]
and Functional Electrical Stimulation(FES) [22, 9, 11, 17,
7, 26].

Phase 1: Although the user cannot visually confirm the hand
motion, he/she feels the motion owing to his/her somatic
sense. (e.g., providing feedback for recognizing virtual
objects)
Phase. 2: The user visually confirms the motion. The user’s
fingers are dependently controlled. (e.g., systems used in
performing arts).
Phase 3: The user’s fingers are independently controlled to
perform grasping and opening motions (e.g., support systems for musical performances and sport activities, navigation systems, and sensory substitution systems for the
visually impaired and the hearing impaired).
Phase 4: The user’s hand is controlled to perform dexterous and powerful motions such as pinching by using the
thumb and index finger (e.g., learning systems for finger
languages and for making handicrafts)

EMS has several applications. EMS is widely used in lowfrequency therapeutic equipment and in devices used for ergotherapy [2, 33]. EMS allows in 15 min of continuous
uses[2]. Akamatsu et al. used EMS in performing arts [19,
25]. EMS is similar to FES [8, 21, 31, 30, 32]. In FES, electrical currents are used to activate nerves innervating extremities that are affected by paralysis resulting from a stroke or
other neurological disorders and spinal cord or head injuries.
FES can be used to treat people with disabilities [34].
Watanabe et al. and Kruijff et al. presented a technique
in which a user’s wrist can be controlled with two degrees
of freedom by stimulating four muscles [15, 30]. They observed that they could control wrist motion by electrically
stimulating a muscle, which resulted in the motion of the tendon connected to the wrist. However, they did not consider
the motion of finger-joints, which is important for controlling the position of the hand. Moreover, they used invasive
electrodes embedded in the skin. Such electrodes are not
suitable for playing musical instruments.

OUR PLAN AND GOAL OF AN APPLICATION

Our goal of an application is to develop a support system for
playing musical instruments with PossessedHand, that can
teach the appropriate hand gestures and timing to a beginner playing a musical instrument. Beginners must devote
considerable time to learning because it is difficult to simply
observe a skillful performance and imitate the required hand
gestures and their timing. This type of learning in which
beginners compare their performance with a skillful performance leads to over fatigue. Skillful playing can be achieved
if the appropriate hand gestures and timing can be taught to
a beginner while he or she is playing a musical instrument.
First, we describe an experiment conducted to identify which
and how finger-joints can be controlled by several stimulation levels. Second, we select the electric pads for daily
uses. Third, we develop PossessedHand device and calibration systems about the location of the pads, the stimulation
level, and stimulation timing. Forth, we verify that the each
joint can be controlled, and users can correctly feel each joint
movement induced by PossessedHand. In addition, we also
discuss the results on the basis of the four phases discussed
above. Finally, we will discuss a support system based on
PossessedHand for playing musical instruments.

It is necessary to use noninvasive electrodes and to avoid fastening electrodes to the hands or fingers because the hands
and fingers are used to hold or touch real objects. The haptic
drum kit is developed by Simon et al [12]. This kit signals
when a drum should be struck while playing drums by using
vibrations. However, it is not effective for playing musical
instruments other than drums such as piano and koto, because it cannot signal which finger should be moved.

544

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

Figure 3. A prototype of PossessedHand.

joint, the third joint in each finger. These muscles are located
at the same position, however these muscle are at different
depths in the user’s forearm [3]. The existing electrical pads
cannot be used to select muscles at different depths because
the pads do not contact the muscles directly. Therefore, invasive needles are used when fine control of finger-joints is
required. However, as previously described, controlling fingers by needles is difficult in daily life.

SOLUTIONS
Muscles and stimulations for making hand postures

We use electrical pulses, 14 channels, and three levels of
electrical stimulations to control the user’s hand. The impulses generated by PossessedHand are transmitted to the
muscles that are to be stimulated through electrode pads fastened to the skin. PossessedHand uses EMS to achieve its
desired output energy and maintain a compact size [13, 27].
An electrical stimulus from PossessedHand is applied to the
user’s forearm because most of the muscles that control the
fingers and the wrist are located the forearm. For this purpose, a forearm belt is used along with PossessedHand. The
electrical stimuli are generated by an electronic pulse generator and transmitted via the electrode pads. The pads are
arranged on the upper and lower parts of the user’s forearm (Figure. 3-(a)). At least, five channels are needed to
stimulate the muscles that are used to bend finger-joints, and
two additional channels are needed to stimulate the muscles
that are used to bend finger extensions and cause wrist flexions. PossessedHand stimulates seven muscles (the superficial flexor muscle, deep flexor muscle, long flexor muscle
of the thumb, common digital extensor muscle, flexor carpi
radialis muscle, long palmar muscle, and flexor carpi ulnaris
muscle). These muscles are located in area B in Figure. 2.
We can select a channel between a pad on the upper portion
of the forearm and one on the lower portion of the forearm.

We tried to select the stimulated muscle by regulating voltages of stimulation. Moreover, we tried to stimulate both the
flexor digitorum superficialis muscle and the flexor digitorum profundus muscle by applying higher voltages of stimulation. We conducted an experiment with various stimulation levels to see which muscle was selected. Figure. 5
shows the result of the experiment. The vertical axis indicates the joint angle. The horizontal axis shows voltages of
the applied current generated by PossessedHand. In this experiment, subjects wore PossessedHand and were told to relax their muscles. We set the back of subjects’ hand touched
the flat of a desk. We measured joint angles starting from
zero (when the finger is completely straight). Then, we raised
the voltage by one volt and measured the joint angles.
The applied stimulation pulse frequency was set to 40 Hz,
and the pulse width was 0.2 ms, and the pulse height (voltage) was in the range of 17 - 29 V (Figure. 4). The pulse
reported is that which gives the user no pain, because it is
similar to the human impulse to move muscles [5, 6, 11].
From this experiment, we found that the depth of the stimulated muscle could be selected by regulating voltages. The
movement of each joint (PIP, DIP, and MP joints) was selected by different voltages. The PIP joint moved independently at 17 V . The PIP joint also moved at 19 V . Therefore,

Stimulation levels and the pulse of electrical stimulation

PossessedHand selects the depth of the muscle by the stimulation levels. The flexor digitorum superficialis muscle is
connected to the proximal interphalangeal(PIP) joint, the
second joint in each finger. The flexor digitorum profundus muscle is connected to the distal interphalangeal(DIP)

545

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

Figure 4. Pulse of electric stimulation by PossessedHand. The Pulse
height is adjusted for the voltage. Pulse width is set 0.2ms to be similar
to nervous signals in human muscles.

Figure 6. A belt and pads.

SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
Prototype of the device

We built a prototype of PossessedHand that consists of a
battery, a condenser, a timing volume, a switching board
(Photo-MOS Relays Series AQV221), a microcontroller, and
24 electrode pads on two belts(Figure. 3, Figure. 6). These
devices are controlled by a graphical user interface (GUI) on
a PC (Figure. 7). The microcontroller is connected to the
PC via a USB cable. The dimensions of PossessedHand are
10.0 cm × 7.0 cm × 8.0 cm, which are portable and suitable
for daily uses and playing musical instruments. The pulse
width is 0.2 ms, and the voltage is in the range of 17 - 29 V .
For safety reasons, the electric are charged in the condenser
that is limited.

Figure 5. An example of the selected muscle depth and movement by
the electric stimulation levels (voltage). Blue line with Diamond makers: MP joint movement. Red line: PIP joint movement. Green line
with times makers: DIP joint movement.

Electric pads and pain

We used solid gel type electrodes (electrical pads) of sizes
10 × 10 mm or larger to prevent electric stimulations from
causing pain. There are three types of noninvasive electrodes.

we concluded that the voltage from 17 to 19 V stimulates the
flexor digitorum superficialis muscle selectively. Voltages
higher than 23 V also stimulated the flexor digitorum profundus muscle, resulting in the movement of the DIP joint
and MP joint.

Dry type electric pads

These pads are made of metallic sheets. These pads are used
to get galvanic skin response (GSR) values. The pads cause
pain when the contact area is small.

Operable joints

Our previous paper/,[28] reported that PossessedHand could
control the motion of 16 joints in the hand. We conducted
an experiment to confirm whether the finger-joints can be
appropriately moved to achieve desired hand postures. We
selected an anode from the seven electrodes placed on the
upper arm and a ground electrode from the seven electrodes
placed on the hand. We tested 7 − by − 7 patterns of the
electronic paths corresponding to each of three peak values
of the pulse (17 V , 23 V , and 29 V ); in other words, we performed 147 stimulations. We asked the subjects to eliminate
strain in the hand. We confirmed that PossessedHand could
control 5 independent and 11 linked joints, 16 joints in total.
We also found that a clasped hand could be opened by stimulating a common digital extensor muscle. Further, users
could recognize the motion of their hands even when their
eyes were closed. These results suggest that PossessedHand
can control hand postures in phases 1, 2, and 3, as discussed
above.

Liquid gel type electric pads

Liquid gel type electric pads have a sponge base. The user
must put some liquid gel on the base before placing the pad
on the user’s skin. The pads cause pain when the human
skin becomes dry because the contact area becomes small
with moisture conditions of the pads.
Solid gel type electric pads

Solid gel type electric pads include conductive gel on thin
metallic sheets. User cause relatively little pain, because the
pads attach to the skin surface with certainly, and the contact
area does not decrease. Self Stick Tyco gel Carbon Electrodes [1] are adapted to PossessedHand.

546

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

(d) Timing calibration button!
(a) Power button!

(e) Auto calibration button of
pad’s positions and stimulation
levels!
(f) Indicator of Stimulation
levels!

(b) Stimulation
buttons by pad’s
number!

(g) Indicator of timing volume !

(h) Sound volume interface!

(c) Stimulation buttons by each joint !
Figure 7. Screenshot of the PossessedHand GUI.

STEP 4. The system checks the pads that can be used to
move each joint.

We also confirmed that users felt no pain from electrical
stimulation (33 V , 100 mA, the pulse width = 0.2 ms) with
the 10 × 10 mm pads. In our experiments, we had ten subjects who wore an eye mask. We adopted solid gel type electric pads that were bigger than 10 × 10 mm in size. In this
work, 10 × 30 mm pads are used on the belts of PossessedHand. We cut the pads into pieces the same height size as
the height of the belt.

STEP 5. The system also selects three optimal stimulation
levels from twelve stimulation levels for use in moving
each joint.
Calibration system for stimulation timing

We suggest an automatic calibration system for PossessedHand that can calibrate the pads’ positions and the electrical
stimulation levels according to individual variations. It is
difficult to fasten the seven pads and set the stimulation levels correctly on a user’s forearm. To solve this problem, we
include as many pads as possible on the belts. 14 pads can be
set on a belt. PossessedHand has two belts, and 28 pads. The
calibration system identifies the pads that are used to stimulate a user’s muscles. The system also selects three optimal
stimulation levels to move each joint from twelve stimulation levels. It works by software base. The calibration steps
are given below:

It is also important that the timings for appropriate musical
instruments are correctly set. We built a calibration system
of stimulation timing on PossessedHand. A user can calibrate the stimulation timing by using a timing volume (Figure. 3-(e) Timing volume). There is always a lag between
the sound timing and the stimulation timing because it takes
some time to generate the electrical stimulations and for the
stimulations to be felt. To synchronize the timing, we introduce a calibration system. The system gives sound and stimulation at the same time. A user can then adjust the timing
using the timing volume (Figure. 3(e) Timing volume), (Figure. 7-(d) Timing calibration button, (g) Indicator of timing
volume). For eight subjects, the average time lag was 0.34
s. The standard error was 0.16 s. In our experiments, all the
subjects could adjust the timing.

STEP 1. Wear PossessedHand. Start the auto calibration
system. (Figure. 7-(e) Auto-calibration button to calibrate
pads’ positions and stimulation levels)

EXPERIMENTS
Probability of each joint movement

Calibration system for individual variation

We checked the probability of each joint movement by PossessedHand and the calibration systems. We had eight subjects. Table. 1 shows the results. We confirmed that PossessedHand could control 5 independent and 11 linked joints,
16 joints in total, with the calibration systems. Figure. 10
shows over half of the probability of each joint movement
from Table 1. Figure. 8 shows that PossessedHand was controlling each of the user’s finger-joints. The results indicate

STEP 2. The auto-calibration system gives 168 stimulation
patterns that include 14 paths (via electric pads on the
belts) and 12 stimulation levels.
STEP 3. Push the joint button on the GUI when the joints
are moved. (Figure. 7-(c) Stimulation buttons for each
joint)

547

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada
Table 1. Probability of each joint movement (%)

joint name
MP(Index finger)
MP(Middle finger)
MP(Medicinal finger)
MP(Littile finger)
PIP(IP) (Thumb)
PIP(Index finger)
PIP(Middle finger)
PIP(Medicinal finger)
PIP(Littile finger)
DIP(Thumb)
DIP(Index finger)
DIP(Middle finger)
DIP(Medicinal finger)
DIP(Littile finger)
Palmar flexion
Dorsal flexion
Radial flexion
Ulnar flexion

Figure 8. Examples of finger-joint movement by PossessedHand.

with other joints
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
87.5
75
87.5
100
100
37.5
0

independently
0
0
0
0
0
100
100
100
12.5
12.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

180

that PossessedHand and the calibration systems can realize
Phases 1, 2, and 3.

160
140

Force per finger

120

We measured the force generated by PossessedHand on each
finger with a spring balance. The eight subjects took part
in this experiment, and did not move their fingers by themselves. The stimulation levels were set to the maximum possible values that did not cause pain to the subjects. The limit
of voltage was 42 V . The locations of the pads were identified by our calibration system. PossessedHand moved MP,
PIP and DIP joints in each finger at the same time. The fingers turned in. The force of each finger were measured by a
spring scale, which mounted on a table and a finger. We set
the back of subjects ’hand touched the flat of a desk. We
noted maximum values of the force in the three seconds.

100
80
60
40
20
(g)! 0
Thumb

Index finger Middle finger

Medicinal
finger

Little finger

Figure 9. Measured forces for each finger.

In this experiment, all forces were too weak to grap real objects and to play musical instruments. Figure. 9 shows the
results. The horizontal axis indicates fingers, while the vertical axis represents the forces (g). The error bars denote
the standard error values. The number of trials per finger
was three, and the total number of trials was 120. The average force was 88.75 g. The forces were not sufficient to
grap and to play musical instruments however were enough
to point out the fingers to be moved.
The Controlling the amount is next step of this research.
That is feasible system, if the system calibrate the relation
between the electric stimulation level and the amount of bend
in a joint. It is reported that the muscle controlling method
is similar to motor controlling method(proportional integral
derivative controller, PID controller), on the electric stimulation experiment by using needle. It will be useful to tell correct hand postures, strength and weakness. In present system
of PossessedHand can not reach the Phase. 4.

Figure 10. Operable joints. Squares indicate independently operable
joints. Arrows and circles indicate ganed operable joints.

548

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

Figure 12. An example of koto score.

Figure 11. Playing styles of Koto. (a) one playing style using 1-3rd
finger, (b) another playing style using 4 or 5th finger.

ger numbers guide which finger should be moved. However,
performers’ view points are almost set on the string numbers of the score for their performances. It is hard to read
the string numbers, timings and finger numbers at the same
time. Then, PossessedHand directly tells the finger number
and timing to the performers.

Somatesthesia

In this experiment, we confirmed that eight subjects could
correctly feel each joint movement induced by PossessedHand. While wearing an eye mask, the subjects could correctly guess which joints were moved by PossessedHand.
The stimulation levels and the locations of the pads were
identified by our calibration system. For three seconds, PossessedHand moved MP, PIP and DIP joints in each finger.
We conducted three trials for each fingers. The total number
of the trials was 120. The results show that PossessedHand
can teach which finger must be moved to output information
and to play musical instruments.

SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS

PossessedHand can be used to help a beginner how to play
musical instruments. In musical instruments, koto, subtle
differences in tones are achieved by fine finger movements.
In this study, we developed an example application: a support system for playing koto. The koto is a traditional Japanese
stringed instrument. Kotos are about 180 centimeters wide
and made from paulownia wood. Koto has 13 strings that
are strung over 13 movable bridges along the width of the
instrument. Players can adjust the string pitches by moving
these bridges before playing. A koto player uses all fingers
to pluck the strings. The player puts three different picks
on the thumb, index finger, and middle finger, respectively
(Figure. 1). In playing koto, it is important when and which
finger should be moved because each finger produces different sound and has a different playing style (Figure. 11).
It is difficult for performers to use visual or sound guides
for the support of the Koto performance, because the performers should read a Koto score and listen to their own performances during their performances. On the score, string
numbers, timings and finger numbers are written. The fin-

For a sample of perfect performances, we transcribe Japanese
koto scores to PossessedHand scores. The Japanese koto
scores included information on when and which fingers should
be moved (Figure. 12). Two beginners (subjects) tried to
play koto by wearing PossessedHand. In this experiment,
we checked that beginners could get the rhythm and make
fewer mistakes by wearing PossessedHand. We used a score,
which was named “Usagi” [18]. The subject played 8-bar
in quadruple time. For eight times, the subject alternated
between normal playing and supported playing by wearing
PossessedHand. The arm located by user-self. The result
is shown in Table 2. It attests that PossessedHand supports
beginners’ playing. Furthermore, PossessedHand will help
beginners move fingers appropriately when playing musical
instruments.

DISCUSSION AND COMMENTS

In Table. 3, We list the comments of the subjects, who contributed to our experiments. Regarding the first comment,
almost all subjects are not used to electric stimulation by
PossessedHand. We must be careful to consider the feeling
of terror. In our future work, PossessedHand’s appearance
will be improved to lessen the feeling of terror.

Table 2. The results of the experiment about the musical performance.

mistakes about finger
timing errors

549

supported
3
4

normal
4
13

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada
Table 3. Comments from the subjects.

subject’s number

comment

1

Scary... just scary...

2

I felt like my forearm was pushed by someone.

3

I felt like when I got a cramp in my arm.

4

A kind of new sense!

5

I want to be controlled remotely.

6

It would be possible that I can do difficult task (such as driving helicopter) without training.

7

It will be useful when playing other instruments such as Piano or Sax other than koto.

8

I felt like my body was hacked.

As for the second comment, the current could stimulate not
only muscles, however also sensory organs. In this case,
pressure sensory organs in the surface of the skin were stimulated. This is unavoidable. However, selecting which ones
to stimulate might be possible in the future by changing the
stimulation frequency or controlling the stimulation depth.

joint. Auto-Calibration systems have been introduced to set
pads’ locations, levels of electrical stimulations and the timing. The calibration system gave 168 stimulation patterns
that included 14 paths (via electric pads on the belts) and 12
stimulation levels. Than, the system selected the pad’s locations and the levels of electrical stimulations from feedback
of finger motions. To synchronize the timing, the system
gave sounds and stimulations at the same time. The user can
adjusted the timing by using a timing volume of PossessedHand.

As for the third comment, PossessedHand now applies current only to two points in one muscle. More elaborated
application of current, such as adding current application
points, would prevent cramp-like feeling.

PossessedHand can selectively apply simulations to muscles at different depths according to three levels of electrical
stimulations, and it can control 5 independent and 11 linked
joints, 16 joints in total, with our auto-calibration systems.
In our experiments, subjects could correctly feel each joint
movement induced by PossessedHand. We also measured
the force generated by PossessedHand for each finger. The
average force was 88.75 g. The forces were not sufficient
to grap a real object and to play musical instruments were
enough to indicate the fingers that needed to be moved.

As for the fourth and eighth comments, people believed their
body was totally “under control”, However PossessedHand
raises questions about their control or “free will”.
As for the sixth comment, PossessedHand now controls only
the hand to enhance musical experiences. In the future, difficult tasks such as flying a helicopter might be possible. Applying current to the shoulder should be studied in the future.
Moreover, combining PossessedHand with other technology
such as context-recognition should be necessary.

We discussed a support system based on PossessedHand for
playing koto, which is a traditional Japanese musical instrument. About the support system of the Koto performance,
we are in the first stage. We must consider effective feedbacks, the controlling the amount of bend, motivations[20]
and so on. In this paper, we confirmed that PossessedHand
could tell a user which finger should be moved at which timing. When using PossessedHand, the subjects could maintain a correct rhythm and made fewer mistakes in finger selection.

As for the seventh comment, PossessedHand can be used to
play any musical instruments. In this study, the koto was
selected as the musical instrument in experiments because it
was the only instrument with which the author was familiar.
We also feel that the use of PossessedHand can be extended
to sports, learning finger languages, performing arts, and
making handicrafts. To extend the use of PossessedHand,
we have to consider reaction rates, accuracy, and muscle fatigue [4, 10, 24].

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CONCLUSION

The authors would like to thank our anonymous reviewers
for their feedback and great suggestions. We thank a japanese
Koto player, Mayuko Kobayashi for her advice. We also
thank all subjects for their participation in the experiments,
Lab-Cafe members and Ken Iwasaki for their help with the
experiments, and Kenichi Kumatani for the discussion. This

PossessedHand can inform the appropriate hand gestures and
the timing of these gestures to a beginner playing a musical instrument. We used electric pulses, 14 channels, and
three levels of electrical stimulations. The system stimulates
the user’s forearm muscles that are connected to each finger-

550

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

work was supported in part by the research fellowship for
young scientists from the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science(JSPS).

11. Hakansson, N., and Hull, M. Muscle stimulation
waveform timing patterns for upper and lower leg
muscle groups to increase muscular endurance in
functional electrical stimulation pedaling using a
forward dynamic model. vol. 56(9) (2009), 2263–70.

REFERENCES

1. Self stick, tyco gel - carbon electrodes. Tyco.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

12. Holland, S., Bouwer, A. J., Dalgelish, M., and Hurtig,
T. M. Feeling the beat where it counts: fostering
Omron, omron battery-operated electronic nerve
multi-limb rhythm skills with the haptic drum kit. In
stimulator (ens), model e2 elite (hv-f127-e), 2009.
Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
http://www.omronTangible, embedded, and embodied interaction, TEI
healthcare.com/export/sites/default/ global/EMC/EMCinfo’10, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010), 21–28.
HV-F127-v01.pdf.
13. Horst, H., Maier-Loth ML, and C, E. The functional
Adams, G., Harris, R., Woodard, D., and Dudley, G.
value of electrical muscle stimulation for the
Mapping of electrical muscle stimulation using mri.
rehabilitation of the hand in stroke patients.
Journal of applied physiology 2 (1993), 532― 537.
Scandinavian journal of rehabilitation medicine 29(1)
(1997), 3.
Boncompagni, S., Kern, H., Micaroni, M., Fano, G.,
Hofer, C., Forstner, C., Modlin, M., Mayr, M., Carraro,
14. Huang, K., Starner, T., Do, E., Weiberg, G., Kohlsdorf,
U., and Protasi, F. Functional electrical stimulation
D., Ahlrichs, C., and Leibrandt, R. Mobile music touch:
(fes) of long-term denervated and degenerated muscles
mobile tactile stimulation for passive learning. In
(ddm) in humans: its effect on the rearrangement of the
Proceedings of the 28th international conference on
excitation-contraction coupling apparatus. Journal of
Human factors in computing systems, CHI ’10, ACM
Muscle Research and Cell Motility. Abstracts: 32nd
(New York, NY, USA, 2010), 791–800.
European Muscle Conference‘ A link between
15. Kruijff, E., Schmalstieg, D., and Beckhaus, S. Using
fundamental research and therapeutic trials ’The
neuromuscular electrical stimulation for pseudo-haptic
Annual Meeting of the European Society for Muscle
feedback. In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on
Research 24 (2003), 354.
Virtual reality software and technology, VRST ’06,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2006), 316–319.
E. C. Hummelsheim H, M.-L. M. The functional value
of electrical muscle stimulation for the rehabilitation of
16. Kuroki, S., Kajimoto, H., Nii, H., Kawakami, N., and
the hand in stroke patients (1997). 3–10.
Tachi, S. Proposal for tactile sense presentation that
combines electrical and mechanical stimulus. In
EB, M., and R, K. Functional walking in paralyzed
EuroHaptics Conference, 2007 and Symposium on
patients by means of electrical stimulation. vol. 175
Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and
(1983), 30–36.
Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics 2007. Second
Joint (2007), 121 –126.
Faghri, P., Rodgers, M. M., Glaser, R., J. Bors, C. H.,
and Akuthota, P. The effects of functional electrical
17. Marsolais, E., and Kobetic, R. Functional electrical
stimulation on shoulder subluxation, arm function
stimulation for walking in paraplegia. In The Journal of
recovery, and shoulder pain in hemiplegic stroke
Bone and Joint Surgery 69 (1987), 728–733.
patients. Archives of physical medicine and
rehabilitation 75 (1994), 73–79.
18. N, M. Usagi, 1968.

8. Farbiz, F., Yu, Z. H., Manders, C., and Ahmad, W. An
electrical muscle stimulation haptic feedback for mixed
reality tennis game. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 posters,
SIGGRAPH ’07, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2007).

19. Nagasawa, Y., Akamatsu, M., and Teruoka, M.
Development of bio-feedback system and applications
for musical performances. vol. 40 (2002), 27―32.
20. Percival, G., Wang, Y., and Tzanetakis, G. Effective use
of multimedia for computer-assisted musical instrument
tutoring. In Proceedings of the international workshop
on Educational multimedia and multimedia education,
Emme ’07, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2007), 67–76.

9. Field-Fote, E. Combined use of body weight support,
functional electric stimulation, and treadmill training to
improve walking ability in individuals with chronic
incomplete spinal cord injury. In Archives of physical
medicine and rehabilitation (2001).

21. Poboroniuc, M., and Stefan, C. A method to test
fes-based control strategies for neuroprostheses. In
Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International
Conference on International Conference on Automation
and Information, World Scientific and Engineering
Academy and Society (WSEAS) (Stevens Point,
Wisconsin, USA, 2008), 344–349.

10. Griffin, L., Decker, M., Hwang, J., Wang, B., Kitchen,
K., Ding, Z., and Ivy, J. Functional electrical
stimulation cycling improves body composition,
metabolic and neural factors in persons with spinal cord
injury. Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology
19(4) (2009), 614―622.

551

CHI 2011 • Session: Art, Music & Movement

May 7–12, 2011 • Vancouver, BC, Canada

22. Rushton, D. Functional electrical simulation and
rehabilitationan hypothesis. In Medical Engineering
and Physics 25 (2003), 75–78.

29. Tsetserukou, D., Sato, K., Neviarouskaya, A.,
Kawakami, N., and Tachi., S. Flextorque: innovative
haptic interface for realistic physical interaction in
virtual reality. ACM (2009), 69.

23. Schuenke, M., Schulte, E., Schumacher, U., Lamperti,
E. D., Ross, L. M., and Wesker, K. H. Atlas of
anatomy: General anatomy and musculoskeletal
system. Prometheus (2005).

30. Watanabe, T., Iibuchi, K., Kurosawa, K., and
Hoshimiya, N. A method of multichannel pid control of
two-degree-of-freedom wrist joint movements by
functional electrical stimulation. Systems and
Computers in Japan 34(5) (2003), 25–36.

24. Shioyama, T., Kondo, T., and ITo, K. Lower-limb joint
torque and position controls by functional electrical
stimulation(fes). IEICE technical report. ME and bio
cybernetics 104(757) (2005), 25―28.

31. Woo, S. H., J.Y.Jang, Jung, E. S., hyun Lee, J., Moon,
Y. K., w Kim, T., Won, C. H., Choi, H. C., and Cho,
J. H. Electrical stimuli capsule for control moving
direction at the small intestine. ACTA Press (2006),
311―316.

25. Stelarc. Ping body.
http://stage.itp.nyu.edu/history/timeline/pingbody.html,
1996.

32. Yagi, R., Sugimoto, Y., Nakatsuchi, Y., Yasunobu, H.,
Shimada, Y., Komatsu, S., Naito, A., Ichie, M., and
Hoshimiya, N. Analysis of hand movement indubed by
functional electrical stimulation in tetraplegic and
hemiplegic patients. The Japanese Journal of
Rehabilitation Medicine 21(4) (1984), 235―242.

26. T. Thrasher, V. Z., McIlroy, W., and Popovic, M.
Rehabilitation of reaching and grasping function in
severe hemiplegic patients using functional electrical
stimulation therapy. Neurorehabilitation and neural
repair 22, 6 (2008), 706.
27. Tachi, S., Tanie, K., and Abe, M. Effects of pulse
height and pulse width on the magnitude sensation of
electrocutaneous stimulus. Japanese journal of medical
electronics and biological engineering 15(5) (1977),
315―320.

33. Zatsiorsky, K. Science and practice of strength training
- ems. Human Kinetics (2006), 132–133.
34. Zhang, D., Guan, T. H., Widjaja, F., and Ang, W. T.
Functional electrical stimulation in rehabilitation
engineering: a survey. In Proceedings of the 1st
international convention on Rehabilitation
engineering; assistive technology: in conjunction with
1st Tan Tock Seng Hospital Neurorehabilitation
Meeting, i-CREATe ’07, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2007), 221–226.

28. Tamaki, E., Miyaki, T., and Rekimoto, J.
Possessedhand: a hand gesture manipulation system
using electrical stimuli. In Proceedings of the 1st
Augmented Human International Conference, AH ’10,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010), 2:1–2:5.

552

