Thermal Visualization on Cooking
Yui Kita

Jun Rekimoto

The University of Tokyo

The University of Tokyo
Sony Computer Science Laboratory

ABSTRACT
Sensors for cooking such as a thermometer provide us essential
clues for a better result. However, they only sense temperature on
a certain point and the user’s reaction is slow. Thermal cameras
are capable of getting thermal images of a cooking pan, but it is
difficult to utilize those images because the user has to rapidly
shift their eye focus from the screen to the cooking pan, and vice
versa while cooking. In this paper we propose a visualization
technique that applies thermal information on cooking. The system
enables users to acquire thermal information from the surface of the
food on a cooking pan, using a thermal camera and a projection
based Augmented Reality (AR) environment. The main contribution
of this paper is to provide a technique to overlap thermal clues on
the cooking pan without occluding the important information on
cooking. We conducted a user study and discussed the potential
applications of our technique.
Keywords: Visualization, AR, cooking, Augmented Kitchen.

Figure 1: A visualized thermal image: the green line indicates
65℃ which is the congealing point of protein, and the red line
indicates 145℃ which is the ideal temperature for cooking. Users
can see both the temperature lines and the surface of the food at
the same time.

1 INTRODUCTION
While we cook, we utilize visual, olfaction, and audio information
to recognize the state of food on the cooking process. However, if
we can use further information like thermal information which we
can’t assess from the vision that we gain with our own eyes, the
result would be better. Nowadays, advances on sensors enable us to
obtain such information about ingredients while cooking.
For example, thermometer provides accurate temperature
measurement that is not available with our limited perceptions. Even
a thermometer is capable of measuring the temperature, it only
provides sensor value in numbers, which requires users to read.
With an advance of thermometer, thermal camera is available to
obtain and analyze spacial temperature clues on cooking. The camera
captures the surface temperature of the food and the user see a
heat map on a display. This is a typical way to measure the
temperature in an experimental cooking, or to analyze the cooking
process in molecular gastronomy [8]. However, in this case, users
have to understand the spacial relationship between the thermal
image and the heating pan (Figure 2a). These reading and recognition
process are obstacles for cooking.
On a heating process, such reading burdens are not only obstacles,
but also results in failures of heat management such as overcooked or
half-baked eggs. To address this issue, we explored a thermal
visualization technique and developed an AR environment that
provides easily recognizable thermal information.
One of the advantages of AR use on cooking [5] is that they reduce
the reading burden of sensor values by mapping annotations directly
onto the actual cooking space. However, they often clutter and
occlude the main object of interests (e.g. food’s color) with
projected annotations. For example, projected annotations may hide
the color of yolk.

Figure 2: The system setup: the user can see the illusion image
created by the LCD through the acrylic panel. The user sees an
image as if the screen is arranged on the surface of the heater.

The contribution of this paper is to realize an AR environment that
provides thermal images without disturbing or hiding important
objects in the actual workspace (Figure 1).
2 CONFIGURATION
Our current prototype is described in Figure 2. The system
consists of a thermal camera, acrylic panel, LCD display, IH
cooking heater and computer. Our system’s configuration is

Figure 3: a) Thermal image on a screen makes the user understand the relationship between the image and the
workspace by rapidly shifting his focus. b) Thermal image using AR environment: although the users can intuitively
see the temperature of the workspace, it occludes the workspace for the user, and s/he miss important food surface
changes. c) Our approach: contours indicate important temperatures for cooking. With this method, the user can
obtain the thermal information without disturbing the workspace.

similar to Holodesk [2], which represents a simple but effective AR
environment. In this configuration, users can see virtual images
created by the LCD display through the acrylic panel. The user
can see optically correct image, i.e., the user can see thermal images
on the surface of the heater as if a screen is arranged on the
surface of the heater.

limited within the important values involved on cooking: 65℃	 
(congealing point of protein) and 140℃	  (ideal temperature for
cooking). This configuration effectively visualizes the thermal
information without occluding the workspace.

Contours are generated as below. The server software of the thermal
camera (provided by OptrisPI200 [6]) sends gray scale images
(Lowest temperature as black, highest as white) to an image
processing software. Then the image processing software generates
contours on the configured threshold (the pixel value that is
corresponding to the focused temperature, 65℃	 in the case of
omelet). Then, warps and adjusts it to optically fit the contours
onto the bottom of the pan.

To confirm the feasibility of the system, we conducted a user study.

We used the OptrisPI200 [6] for the thermal camera. The
measurement range is between 0 and 250 Celsius. The resolution
is 160 x 120 with the frame rate of 128 Hz. The measurement error
is within 2%.
We considered several possible methods to visualize the surface
temperature of the cooking pan. The simplest configuration is to
simply show thermal images on an independent screen (Figure 3a).
This configuration requires users to understand the relationship
between the thermal image and the actual workspace. As a result,
the user has to rapidly shift his/her eye focus between the screen
and the cooking pan.
Figure 3b shows an AR environment that simply overlaps the thermal
image on the workspace. In this case, the user can see the thermal
image without shifting the eye focus between the two spaces.
However, in this case, the thermal image occludes the surface of the
food itself. This is unsuitable for a practical cooking support
because the food surface information such as reflection or color of
the food is important for cooking.
The consideration of the two cases (Figure 3a and b) suggests an
AR limitation of providing information about an object without
occluding the object itself, as [3] suggested.
To address this issue, our system adopts the visualization of enclosing
the area with similar temperature (Figure 3c). To minimize the hidden
area of the workspace, the contours are

3 USER STUDY

There are several recipes that require heat management. For example,
boiling (e.g. stew) or frying requires careful heat management to
heat the food sufficiently, or avoid over cooking. Although these
recipes are suitable to evaluate the system in some cases, we used
omelet recipe to evaluate the system by following reasons:
First, as the previous work shows, to evaluate a cooking support
system, the recipe of the user study should be popular [4]. This is
because distinctive prior knowledge and skills about cooking of
participants make it difficult to evaluate the system itself. We
considered omelet is suitable to evaluate the system because all
participants have s i m i l a r experience of cooking omelet.
The omelet is thin (we used only one egg for each omelet), and it
requires rapid and accurate heat management compared to other
recipes. We considered this difficulty makes it easier to evaluate
the system limitation.
Our user study setup and procedures are described in the following:
l
l
l

Our system visualizes the thermal information of the surface
of the cooking pan as well as the foods on it.
The contours indicate the temperature of congealing point for
protein (65℃) while cooking.
Participants are asked to bring the pan out of the heater if
the contours are all disappeared (at this point, all proteins
are just cooked and the egg is neither overcooked nor halfcooked).

We recruited two males (A, C) and one female (B). Participants
were asked to cook an omelet with and without the system, one
time for each. Every participant cooks 2 to 3 times in a week.

Professionals are not included, and they cook at home in their daily
life. Participants were also asked to use the same type of heater
prior to the user study. This is because the type of heater can be
a strong factor of the result, and different types of heater requires
a few times of exercise to get used to it.
Participant A is 27 years old, male. He lives with his family. He
lived by himself for four years. He cooked for himself about once
a week when he was living by himself. His brother and father are
working for food-related companies, and he has advanced knowledge
about food and cooking. He also cooks with his family using foods
from his family's garden. He has own cooking pan for omelet, and
he prefers better eggs.
Participant B is 25 years old, female. She lived by herself for four
years. Currently, she lives with her family, and she often cooks
with her family. Her mother is good at cooking, and she said she
learned cooking by looking her mother. She is especially good at
cooking Japanese foods. She also has skills and knowledge about
sweets cooking, and she cooks sweets such as muffins and cookies
about once a month with her mother.
Participant C is 24 years old, male. He lived by himself four years,
cooks about twice in a week. His family lives near his house, and
he often comes backs and cooks with his family. He likes Japanese
and Chinese food. He also cooks using a cooking pan and used to it.
Participant A and B cooked an omelet with the system first, and C
cooked an omelet without the system first.
3.1 Result
Figure 4 shows the result of omelet cooked with the system (left)
and without the system (right). The result shows that the omelets
cooked with the system are evenly heated and tender, while omelets
cooked without the system are unevenly heated and overcooked or
not half-baked.
We asked the participants about the results and the usability of the
system. All participants answered that the omelets cooked with the
system are more preferable compared to those cooked without the
system.

In addition to the user's comment, we asked another five people to
decide which do they prefer (We showed the real omelet of
Figure 4), and four out of five preferred the omelets cooked with
the system.
Participant A had difficulties on cooking with the pan, because he
usually cooks omelets with specialized cooking pan. He also argued
that the acrylic panel could be an obstacle for cooking.
4 DISCUSSION
We consider that one of the reasons of this significant result is
because we are not capable to see the denaturation of protein: when
we bake eggs, visible changes of egg surface begin on 68-70℃,
while egg’s protein will be congealed with 65℃.
Using the system, users are able to see the congealing point of
protein by the contours that indicate the 65℃	 line and thus help to
perform better heat management. All participants also answered
that the contours were thin enough, and they felt no difficulty on
cooking referring the contours and see the surface of the omelet at
the same time.
Participant A commented that he usually estimate the temperature
of the cooking pan according to his experience, but using the system,
he could grasp the temperature, and also felt easiness because the
system shows important temperature for cooking an omelet.
Participant B also answered that she was thinking that she cannot
cook well in an unfamiliar kitchen environment because she uses
lots of tools for cooking in her kitchen. On the contrary of her
concern, she commented she could cook well because all she could
focus on checking the important information in stead of relaying her
experience.
Participant C commented that he has confident both of the omelet
(omelets cooked with/without the system). However, he also
commented that using the system reduced his work to check and
estimate the temperature of the pan while cooking, and it made
him to cook omelet easier.
These comments suggest that participants can manage the
temperature of the pan using the thermal information without being
disturbed by it. They also suggest that the system reduce their work
to estimate the temperature of the pan. This is useful to help users to
cook multiple foods simultaneously.
While minimum contours are enough for cooking an omelet, contours
can be obstacles when the user needs to monitor several different
temperatures. In this case, our visualization technique is not
sufficient to provide thermal information to the user without
disturbing the workspace.
5 FUTURE WORK
This visualization is efficient for users to know if s/he has heated
the foods enough. However, it is inefficient for them to find cooler
area and smoothly correct the unevenness of heating, because the
visualization only shows the temperature on the line, and it is not
clear which side of the line is higher (Figure 5a). By providing
thinner auxiliary lines around the main line (Figure 5b), the system
can indicates heat information to the users. They are useful for the
users to correct the unevenness of heating by moving the cooking
pan on the heater.

Figure 4: Results of omelet cooked with the system (left, 1), and
without the system (right, 2) by participant A, B and C. Although
each participant has different cooking skills, there was a
significant difference between results 1 and results 2. Omelets
cooked with the system (A1, B1 and C1) are smooth and tender
while these cooked without the system are overcooked (A1) or
half raw (C2).

In addition to the occlusion problem, AR fails when colors are
mixed into the initial view. For example, the configuration for omelet
(note that we manually used green and red contours for yellow
omelet) is not applicable for Chinese food that often contains red or
green food because the AR indication will be mixed into the colors
of the view.
One of the simple solutions for this issue is to setup a camera to
capture the color of the view, and color the indication in high contrast
colors. However, it requires additional camera settings to AR
systems that use non-camera information for AR (e.g. location
information). In addition, it requires the camera to share the view
with the user.
Our visualization technique will also support human perception in
various situations (Figure 6). For example, on surgery, cutting a
thick blood vessel causes extra bleeding which will be a crucial
visual obstacle for a successful operation. Using our visualization
technique, the surgeon can ware a lightweight AR devices such as
Google Glass[1]. Based on the thermal information on the part of
operation, the system can visualize important blood vessels,
maintaining the workspace that contains complex issues, at the same
time.

Figure 5: Contours indicate the important temperature without
occluding the workspace (left). However, contours are often
insufficient for users to know which side of the contour is the
higher side. This makes users confused especially when they
want to correct the unevenness of heating. Our system indicates
the higher side by providing thinner lines around the main line
(right).

Another possible application is air condition designing for
architectures. Architects would be able to explore and inspect
functional defects of the air conditioning on the architectures, at the
same time confirming materials of walls or windows.
Recent studies show practical and low-cost implementation for gaze
tracking [7]. They are useful to analyze where and what people tend
to see in the workspace.
Analysis of the gaze tendency would reveal the important area where
people frequently see. By using this data, the thermal information
can be arranged more effectively to avoid the important area, and
appear where people less frequently see. For example, by tracking
chefs’ gazing area during cooking process, the system finds areas
where chefs less frequently see, and arrange the thermal information
visualization.

6 RELATED WORK
Previous works focusing on cooking activities have been proposed:
Panavi [4] supports professional cooking at home using video
instruction or thermal sensor attached on the pan. As far as we
know, Panavi is the first experiment that utilized thermal
information of a pan for real time feedback. Although it supports
brief thermal information, and thus the system cannot measure the
temperature of cooking ingredients.
Bonnani et al proposes a graphically enhanced kitchen environment.
Counter Intelligence [5] is a system to provide an AR environment
in a conventional kitchen. Their focus is to coordinate between
multiple tasks and increase confidence in the system with the
projection of information onto the surfaces of objects in the kitchen
or cookware. Counter Intelligence includes five discrete systems.
HeatSink and RangeFinder provide techniques to provide
temperature information in the kitchen.
HeatSink is a thermal information display that colorizes cold water as
blue, and hot water as red. Although their thermal visualization of
water is simple and effective display, the application is limited in
transparent water.

Figure 6: The system can visualize important blood vessels to the
surgeon without disturbing the workspace that contains complex
issues (left). Another possible application is air condition
designing for architectures. Architects would be able to explore
and inspect functional defects of the air conditioning, at the same
time confirming other conditions such as materials of walls or
windows (right).

RangeFinder [5] measures the surface temperature of the food while
cooking using a remote infrared thermometer, and projects useful
information directory onto the cookware or food itself. For example, it
determines when food reaches a desired temperature (for example,
when water boils), and time the duration of the state.
The difference between CounterIntelligence and our system is that
our system provides detailed information without occluding the
workspace while CounterIntelligence is based on projections. In
this configuration, detailed information projected around the
workspace confuses the busy user because users have to shift their
focus between the information and the workspace. For a more
suitable visual support, the information should be visualized on the
workspace to reduce user’s focus shift. In this case, projections are
unsuitable because projections on foods make both colors
undistinguishable. Our system provides a practical visualization
technique and AR environment for the temperature control without
confusing the temperature information and the workspace.

7 CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a visualization technique of thermal information in cooking environment using a thermal camera and simple
AR environment.
Our contribution is to provide thermal information without disturbing
the cooking workflow. Our system visualizes contours which
indicate important temperature to avoid overlapping thermal
information onto the workspace.
We conducted a user study and demonstrated the utility of our
approach where participants advanced their skill in cooking an omelet.
We conclude this paper by discussing limitations and potential
applications.
REFERENCES
[1] Google Glass.s http://www.google.com/glass/start/
[2] Hilliges, O., Kim, D., Izadi, S., Weiss, M. and Wilson, A.D. 2012.
Holodesk: Direct 3D Interactions with a Situated SeeThrough
Display. In Proc. of ACM SIGCHI ’12.
[3] Bell, B., Feiner, S. and Höllerer, T. View management for virtual
and augmented reality. Proc. UIST '01. ACM Press (2001), 101-110.
[4] Uriu, D., Namai, M., Tokuhisa, S., Kashiwagi, R., Inami, M., and
Okude, N. panavi: Recipe medium with a sensors-embedded pan for
domestic users to master professional culinary arts. Proc. CHI ’12.
[5] L. Bonanni and C.-H. Lee. The Kitchen as a Graphical User Interface.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2004 Art gallery (SIGGRAPH ’04), Sue
Gollifer (Ed.). 109-111.
[6] Optris, http://www.optris.com/
[7] Ishiguro, Y., Mujibiya, A., Miyaki, T., and Rekimoto, J. Aided eyes:
eye activity sensing for daily life. Proc. Augmented Human 2010,
ACM Press, (2010), 1-7.
[8] N.Myhrvold, C.Young, M.Bilet, R.M.Smith, Modernist Cuisine: The
Art and Science of Cooking, 2011, Cooking Lab

