Visualizing Water Flows with Transparent Tracer Particles
for a Surround-Screen Swimming Pool
Shogo Yamashita

The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Xinlei Zhang

The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Shunichi Suwa

The University of Tokyo
Sony Computer Science
Laboratories
Tokyo, Japan

Miyaki Takashi

The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan

Jun Rekimoto

The University of Tokyo
Sony Computer Science
Laboratories
Tokyo, Japan

ABSTRACT
A surround-screen swimming pool can realize various forms
of underwater entertainment and enable enhanced swimming training with supplemental visual information during
underwater activities. However, one of the big challenges
for such an augmented swimming pool is user interaction
because the surround screen and water can make existing
position-tracking methods unusable. In this paper, we propose a water ﬂow visualization method with transparent
tracer particles to enhance interactivity. We used an optical property of clear plastics called birefringence that provides vivid colors on transparent tracer particles when they
are between two circular polarization sheets. Tracing objects using cameras in front of a complex background is not
a stable method, but this technology enables visible tracer
particles on a simple and dark background. For underwater
entertainment, the water ﬂow tracing works as a user interface because the transparent tracer particles do not stop
users from viewing the images on the screen. For enhanced
swimming training, swimmers can view visualized water ﬂow
caused by strokes in the augmented swimming pool. From
the results of our stability evaluation of water ﬂow tracing,
the proposed method is valid even for complex backgrounds.
We also conducted a feasibility test of the enhanced swimming training. According to the trial, the tracing particles
could visualize the water ﬂow caused by the strokes made
by a swimmer.

Keywords
Swimming; Augmented Sports; Water Flow Visualization;
Underwater Entertainment
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

AH ’17, March 16-18, 2017, Mountain View, CA, USA
c 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4835-5/17/03. . . $15.00

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3041164.3041171

Figure 1: Surround-screen swimming pool for underwater entertainment and enhanced swimming
training.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Moderate exercise is useful in maintaining our physical
ﬁtness. Swimming is a healthy activity widely enjoyed by
many people. In general, people swim in a swimming pool,
but it is sometimes problematic to stick to a workout routine.
One of the reasons is that repeating the same activity in the
same place tends to be dull. Swimming in a pool involves
constantly repeating monotonous motions in less diversiﬁed
scenery.
Therefore, we introduced an augmented swimming pool
where the entire view of the user is surrounded by synthetic
images (Figure 1). With this conﬁguration, the user can
enjoy a swimming experience as if he or she were swimming
in a real sea with coral reefs. This conﬁguration can provide
users with an enhanced swimming experience.
To provide underwater entertainment, user interfaces to
interact with the system are required. However, existing
devices for this purpose (such as game controllers and visionbased sensors) are diﬃcult or impossible to use in a surroundscreen swimming pool [25]. Moreover, position tracking devices using Infrared (IR) are not functional owing to IR absorption by the water [6]. Devices using visible light do not
work reliably in the surround-screen environment when displaying complex images [30].
In this paper, we describe a polarization-based technique

to put water ﬂow tracing in practice in the surround-screen
swimming pool. This water ﬂow tracing technology enables
a user interface for underwater entertainment. For example,
the user is able to move computer-generated characters in
the scene by water ﬂow. The user may also change the
setting of the system by causing predetermined directions of
water ﬂow in the swimming pool. In addition, for swimming
training, swimmers can view visualized water ﬂow caused by
strokes in the swimming pool.
Water ﬂow tracing can be realized by using tracer particles
scattered in the water [19]. Cameras track the movement of
the particles in the water to measure the water ﬂow. However, tracer particles used in previous studies are not preferable for the augmented swimming pool because the particles
stop users from viewing the content on screen. Therefore, we
propose transparent plastics as tracer particles. The tracing particles show vivid colors on the surface when they are
between two polarizing sheets. Thus, the particles enable
water ﬂow tracing that does not interfere with the underwater entertainment.

2.

RELATED WORK

Surround-screen environments are widely used for entertainment and collaboration in other research works. The
Cave Automatic Virtual Environment is a surround-screen
projection-based virtual reality environment [7, 31]. There
were several attempts using this system to enhance product
development [9, 15] and games [13]. Therefore, it is known
that a surround-screen environment can enhance the entertainment experience and improve the eﬃciency of learning.
However, the capability of this environment in the water
has not been studied. In this research, we introduce an underwater surround-screen swimming pool and evaluate its
capability.
The AquaTop Display enables underwater entertainment
by detecting the user’s body movement in a bath [17], but
this system cannot be used as a swimming training environment because the water must be white to display images
from a projector on the water surface.
Morales proposed a system with a hand-held augmented
reality display for supporting divers [20]. Ukai et al. proposed a swimming support system using an underwater robot
that swims with a user and shows information via an attached underwater display [29]. This might be useful for
swimming training. However, these displays are mainly used
for providing information, and the size of the display is limited. For this reason, it is still diﬃcult to cover a users’
entire view as in the case of entertainment.
For ﬂuid measurement, tracer particles or tufts [12] are
widely used. Fluid visualization methods such as Particle
Image Velocimetry [1] and Laser Doppler Velocimetry [14]
use lasers to illuminate the measurement environment to
make the particles visible. These methods are not suitable for the surround-screen environment because the illumination itself and visible tracer particles interfere with the
user’s ability to view the screens. Therefore, we introduce a
method to provide a clear view and achieve water ﬂow visualization using lights only from screens. PhotoelasticTouch
achieves a user interface in front of a display using the photoelastic eﬀects of soft plastics [26, 24]. A user grabs a lump
of clear and soft plastic with his or her ﬁngers and places it
in front of a display. The system detects the user’s pinches
and the positions by measuring the changes in the polar-

ization property of the plastic. However, this measurement
method is unusable for tracing particles because the stress
applied to the plastic is not caused by water.
There has been some research on swimming motion simulations [16, 5]. Motion simulation from actual captured data
may enable water ﬂow estimation, but accurate motion capture is quite challenging in the surround-screen environment.
There have been attempts to improve the eﬃciency of the
swimming motion. Tan et al. proposed a system to improve
the swimming form of an underwater robot ﬁsh by using
water ﬂow visualization [27]. Nakashima et al. conducted
research, using an underwater robot arm, on unsteady ﬂuid
forces acting on limbs in swimming [23]. However, water ﬂow
visualization in a swimming environment with humans has
not been achieved. There exist several methods to measure
swimming form using sensors such as wearable sensors [2]
and underwater motion-capture systems [4]. Nevertheless,
showing captured information to a swimmer in real time is
still an issue because wireless communication between the
device and a computer in water is quite challenging [21],
and motion capture in a complex background is not always
stable [30].

Transparent tracer particles
are scattered in a water tank 

Transparent tracer particles
do not stop users from
viewing the images
(a) Transparent tracer particles are distributed in a water tank in
front of a screen coated with right circular polarizing sheets. 
Visualized tracer particles

Left circular polarizing sheet

(b) Transparent tracer particles seen through a left circular
polarizing sheets. The transparent tracer particles do not stop users
from viewing the images on the screen, but are clearly visible for a
camera for tracking.

Figure 2: Transparent tracer particles in
the water. The particles show vivid color
when placed between tow polarizing sheets.
This ﬁgure shows a result when the screen is
coated with right-handed circular polarizing
sheets. 1 .

3.

WATER FLOW TRACING WITH TRANSPARENT TRACER PARTICLES

We implemented water ﬂow visualization and tracing technology for underwater entertainment and enhanced swimming training. To visualize the water ﬂow in a surroundscreen swimming pool, we scattered tracer particles in the
water. The tracing particles were made of plastic and were
transparent in the water. However, the tracing particles
showed vivid color when we observed them in front of a
right-handed circular polarizing sheet through a left-handed
circular polarizing sheet. Simultaneously, the background
images became dark owing to the light shielding caused by
the combination of left- and right-handed circular polarizing sheets. This enables us to provide the user a constantly
clear view of the displayed content in the pool, and stable
visible-light-based water ﬂow tracing as user interfaces. Figure 2 (a) shows scattered transparent tracer particles in a
water tank in front of a display coated with a right-handed
circular polarizing sheet. Figure 2 (b) shows the visualized
tracer particles by a left-handed circular polarizing sheet.

3.1

Figure 3: Scenery for underwater entertainment. The bottom and walls of the swimming pool display a computer-generated
scene ﬁlled with coral reefs.

User causing a water flow
Transparent tracer particle 

Surround-Screen Swimming Pool

In a surround-screen swimming pool, a swimmer’s entire
view is surrounded by a synthetic image. This environment
has two main characteristics to enhance the swimming experience. One of the functions of the pool is to provide underwater entertainment. The user in the pool can enjoy the
content displayed on the walls and/or bottom. For example,
users can enjoy swimming in beautiful underwater scenery
and can interact with aquatic life. Another characteristic is
enhanced swimming training. The environment is helpful in
improving swimming skills because the pool can show useful
information to users, including the user’s swimming form or
any sensing data in the pool.
We prepared a prototype of the augmented swimming
pool. The size of the swimming pool was 3m × 2m × 1m.
Acrylic panels with a thickness of 3cm were used as the walls
of the swimming pool. Each panel was coated with a rearprojection sheet, except for one side that remained uncoated
in order to view the inside of the pool. We used six ultrashort throw projectors (RICOH PJ WX4141): three for the
side panels and three for the bottom screen. A single Mac
Pro with six Thunderbolt display ports was used to generate the images for the projectors. The inside of the pool was
coated with circular polarizing sheets.

3.1.1

Virtual character of a jellyfish.
(The character moves in accordance
with a tracer particle in the water tank)

Figure 4: A user causing a water ﬂow to interact with a virtual character of a jellyﬁsh.
The character moves in accordance with a
tracer particle in the water tank.2 .
Visualized water flow
produced by strokes

User can view his/her own
swimming form in real time

Underwater Entertainment

In the surround-screen swimming pool, swimmers can enjoy the surrounding scenery as if they were swimming in a
real sea with coral reefs. Figure 3 shows the swimming pool
displaying a computer-generated scene ﬁlled with coral reefs.
Water ﬂow tracing technology enables a user interface for
controlling the system and interactions with virtual characters for the underwater entertainment. For example, the
user is able to move a computer-generated character by water ﬂow (Figure 4). The user may also change the setting
of the system by causing predetermined directions of water
ﬂow in the water.
1
The picture was taken by Greg Goebel.
Photo title: False Clown Anemoneﬁsh, Scrips Birch Aquarium,
La Jolla, California 2012
License: CC BY-SA 2.0
https://ﬂic.kr/p/dLAGyC

Figure 5: Enhanced swimming training with
visualized water ﬂow. A swimmer’s form
is displayed on the bottom, and he/she
can view his/her own swimming form in
real time with the water ﬂow produced by
strokes.

3.1.2

Enhanced Swimming Training

Analyzing one’s own swimming form is important in improving swimming skills. However, it is not easy for a swim2

Tsukamoto. http://www.wanpug.com/kitei.html

mer or even a coach to correctly recognize swimming forms.
In the augmented swimming pool, the swimmer can view
an ideal swimming form and/or his/her swimming form displayed on the bottom and/or walls of the swimming pool.
Water ﬂow visualization is helpful for swimming training because the swimmer can visually see the water current caused
by his/her strokes in the swimming pool. By comparing the
visualized water ﬂow and swimming form with those of a
professional swimmer, a swimmer can learn how to swim
more eﬃciently. Figure 5 shows a user swimming, with his
own swimming form displayed on the bottom of the pool
with visualized water ﬂows.

3.2

(a) Polystyrene tray seen
without polarizing sheets

(b) Polystyrene tray between a left
circular polarizing sheet and a
right circular polarizing sheet

Transparent Tracer Particles

We prepared two types of transparent particles. One type
of particle consists of polystyrene pieces taken from trays
widely used for packing foods. Tracer particles made of
polystyrene sink in the water and are buoyed by a slight water ﬂow because the speciﬁc gravity of polystyrene is close
to that of water. The other particles are polyethylene ﬁlms
ﬂoating on the water.
Photoelasticity eﬀects are seen on transparent plastics
placed between two polarizing sheets [22, 10]. The eﬀects
produce vivid colors in the transparent plastic, as shown in
Figure 6. Photoelastic materials exhibit the property of double refraction upon the application of stresses at the time of
manufacture. We used some parts of a polystyrene tray as
one type of tracer particle to show this vivid color.
Birefringence is an optical property of a material. Birefringence is formally deﬁned as the double refraction of light
in transparent materials such as plastic ﬁlms for wrapping
[11]. When the materials are placed between two polarization sheets, the clear materials exhibit vivid colors. Figure 7
shows the setup for viewing the colored plastic ﬁlms. We prepared a polyethylene ﬁlm of 0.03-mm thickness and placed
it between two linear polarizing sheets on a white backlight.
Figure 8 shows the color on the transparent plastic ﬁlm. The
left side of Figure 8 shows the ﬁlm placed between two linear
polarizing sheets with parallel polarization angles, and the
right side of Figure 8 shows those with orthogonal polarization angles. The ﬁlm shows diﬀerent colors depending on
the polarization angles of the polarization sheets. We used
the polyethylene ﬁlms as one type of tracer particle.

3.3

Left circular polarizing sheet 

(c) Tracer particles made of Polystyrene are placed between left and
right circular polarizing sheets. The particles are taken from the place
surrounded by a red dot on Polystyrene trays. A White backlight for
the display is placed under the sheets to take the picture.

Figure 6: Photoelasticity eﬀects produce colors in
transparent plastics placed between two polarizing
sheets.
Camera
Plastic sheet

Polarizing
sheet
(0° or 90°)

Polarizing
sheet (0°)

Backlight

Figure 7: Setup for showing vivid colors
caused by birefringence.

Difference between Linear and Circular
Polarization

Vivid colors are seen on plastic sheets between two polarization sheets. We used circular polarizing sheets instead of
linear polarizing sheets in the pool.
The reason is that the vivid color on plastic sheets disappears at certain angles between two linear polarizing sheets,
as shown in Figure 9. However, vivid colors are always seen
independent of the angles of plastic sheets between two circular polarizing sheets, as shown in Figure 10. For linear
polarizing sheets, the plastic sheet becomes clear at 0◦ and
90◦ . On the other hand, the plastic sheet remains colored
between two circular polarizing sheets. When tracking the
water ﬂow, the tracer particle must always be visible from
the camera. Therefore, we used right-handed circular polarizing sheets in the pool and left-handed circular polarizing
sheets for the cameras to track tracer particles placed above
and/or in the pool.

Figure 8: Polyethylene ﬁlm placed between
two linear polarizing sheets with parallel polarization angles and orthogonal polarization
angles.

-45°

-10°

Image

Polarizing Sheet

Screen

Tracer Particle

(a)

Without

Visible

Invisible

(b)
(c)

Left Circular
Right Circular

Invisible
Visible

Visible
Visible

0°

(a)

10°

45°

(c)

90°

Figure 11: Relationship of visibility between
types of polarizing sheets as seen by a camera, screens, and tracer particles when the
screen is coated with right-handed circular
polarization sheets.

Figure 9: Colors on a polyethylene ﬁlm disappear at certain angles for linear polarizing
sheets.

-45°

-10°

0°

10°

45°

90°

Figure 10: Colors on polyethylene ﬁlm are
always seem independent of the angles for
circular polarizing sheets.

3.4

(b)

Difference between Left- and Right-Handed
Circular Polarization

Figure 11 shows tracer particles in a water tank coated
with a right-handed circular polarizing sheet, without polarizing sheets, through a left-hand circular polarizing sheet,
and with a right-handed circular polarizing sheet.
The situation shown in Figure 11 (a) provides a clear view
of screens to users. The situation in Figure 11 (b) enables
the stable tracking of tracer particles because bright tracer
particles on a simple background are ideal for tracking objects. The inside of the pool is coated with right-handed
circular polarizing sheets. Right-handed circularly polarized
lights are shielded by left-handed circular polarizing sheets.
In brief, the projected images seem dark if we mount a lefthanded circular polarization sheet on the lens of a camera.
This conﬁguration enables stable water ﬂow tracing in environments with complex backgrounds.
Both the screen and the tracer particles are visible in the
situation of Figure 11 (c). The colors of the tracer particles
become complementary colors when we change the circular polarizing sheet from left-handed to right-handed. By
wearing goggles when using right-handed circular polarizing
sheets, users can directly view visualized water ﬂows and images on the screen simultaneously. The colors of the tracer
particles become complementary colors when we change the
circular polarizing sheet from left-handed to right-handed.

(a) Result of blob detection 

(b) Result of optical flow 

Figure 12: Tracer particles are traceable by using
simple image processing such as blob detection and
optical ﬂow.

3.5

Tracing Method

To track the tracer particles ﬂoating in or on the water, we
can use image processing such as optical ﬂow and blob detection [8]. Figure 12 (a) and (b) show the results of tracking
blob detection and optical ﬂow, respectively. Tracer particles made of polystyrene move in accordance with the water
ﬂows in the water tank. As backlights, we used a display
showing a white image. Tracer particles are recognized as
blobs and are traceable by using blob detection technology.
We used a blob detection processing library for the test. The
threshold value of luminosity was 0.5, which is the default
value. The optical ﬂow can visualize the water ﬂow by tracing the movement of tracer particles ﬂoating in the water.
To test the optical ﬂow approach, we used code for the optical ﬂow that was uploaded at openprocessing.com by Sid
Gabriel Hubbard.
We have to correct for the pincushion distortion when
using a ﬂat-shaped underwater housing for a camera to track
the particles in the water. Pincushion distortion is an eﬀect
in the water that causes images to become pinched at the
center. This distortion is seen in images taken in the water
because of the diﬀerences in the refractive index between
air and water [28]. A dome-shaped lens can correct the
pincushion distortion optically [3]. Image-processing-based
camera calibration [18] is also valid for this purpose.

3.6

Dependence on Background Images

Figure 13 shows the changes in brightness depending on
the color of the backlight. Figure 13 (a) shows the color of
a tracer particle on a white backlight. The color is orange
with a white background, which indicates the ﬁlm will pass
through light with a wavelength of approximately 400 nm
more than other colors. In other words, the tracing particle reduces the brightness with a blue backlight because
blue is the complementary color of orange. Figure 13 (b)
shows the same tracing particle with a blue background. The
brightness is signiﬁcantly reduced in this case. However, the
brightness increases with a red background, as shown in Figure 13 (b) because the wavelength is close to that of orange.
Distorting the particles or using particles with the photoelasticity eﬀect can reduce the loss of traceable particles.
Figure 14 shows a distorted tracing particle ﬂoating in a water tank with various colors of backlight. Figure 14 (a) shows
the ﬁlm in front of a white backlight. With the distortion on
the ﬁlm, other colors in addition to orange are seen on the
tracer particle. This indicates the tracer particle is visible
on a background with more colors. This enables the tracing of water ﬂow in complex scenes displayed on the screen
in the pool. As shown in Figure 14 (b) and (c), diﬀerent
parts of the tracer particle are bright on the blue and red
backgrounds.
The color changes in accordance with the distance that
the polarized lights pass in the plastic. For example, our
polyethylene sheet of 0.03 mm thickness shows orange color
with a white background. If the thickness is approximately
0.06 mm or 0.12 mm, the sheet shows yellow and green,
respectively. This change in color occurs when the sheet
is slanted in the horizontal direction, because the polarized
lights pass more in the plastic in this case. For this reason,
the distorted sheet shows multiple colors.

3.7

Transparency

The transparency of tracer particles in the water depends
on their material. The refractive index of water is 1.33. If
the refractive index of the material is close to the water, the
material is more transparent in the water (Figure 15). A
tracing particle is visible on the surface of the water, but
becomes mostly invisible in the water. This transparency
also depends on the angles of the tracing particle in the
water because the surface sometimes reﬂects the light from
the background at certain angles, and the particle becomes
visible at that time.

3.7.2

(c) Red backlight

Figure 13: Change in brightness depending
on color of background image.

(a) White backlight

(b) Blue backlight

(c) Red backlight

Figure 14: Distortion on the ﬁlm produces
other colors in addition to the default color
on the tracer particle. This enables the
tracer particle to be traceable in more colors
of background images.

Tracer particle on the water

Tracer particle in the water

Differences by Material

The characteristics of the tracer particles greatly depend
on their material. Therefore, we describe several factors affecting water ﬂow visualization and tracking in this section.
We prepared two types of tracer particles in this study. Distorted polyethylene ﬁlms ﬂoat on the water, and polystyrene
ﬁlms sink in the water. Both tracer particles easily sink and
ﬂoat in the water with a little water ﬂow. By combining
these tracer particles, we can visualize water ﬂow on the
surface of the water, and in the water near the bottom.

3.7.1

(a) White backlight (b) Blue backlight

Flotation

Several types of plastic can ﬂoat on the water surface. For
example, tracer particles made of polyethylene ﬂoat on the
water surface, yet sink into the water easily by the stroke of
a user in the swimming pool. The ﬂotation depends on the

Figure 15: Transparency of a tracer particle in the
water and on the water.
speciﬁc gravity of the material. The speciﬁc gravity of water
is 1.00, and polyethylene is approximately 0.95. This means
pure polyethylene ﬂoats on the water. The speciﬁc gravity
of polystyrene is approximately 1.04, which indicates that it
sinks in water. The tracer particles are buoyed by the water
currents in the swimming pool.

3.7.3

Durability to Water

We conducted a test to check the durability in water. As a
result, some plastics changed color and transparency after an
hour in the water. While polyethylene and polystyrene retained their transparency, ﬁlms made of oriented polypropylene quickly became whiter in the water.

4.

EVALUATION

We evaluated the stability of water ﬂow tracking technology by using transparent tracer particles in the water
with various types of background. Tracer particles having
photoelasticity eﬀects were traceable with most of the backgrounds, including underwater video. However, the technology was not available with a dark background that had a

scene of the universe.
We also conducted a feasibility test of water ﬂow visualization for swimming training. Tracer particles made of
polyethylene ﬂoating on the water were able to visualize the
movement of the water near the water surface. Moreover,
tracer particles made of polystyrene were able to visualize
the water ﬂow in the water near the bottom. However, the
water ﬂow in the middle of the water layer was barely seen
by the tracer particles. To visualize water currents caused
by strokes in the middle of the water via breaststrokes, more
investigation into materials for tracer particles is required.

4.1

Threshold 0.5 (Default value) 
(b) Green background

(a) White background

Stability Test of Water Flow Tracing
Threshold 0.3 (To detect darker blobs) 

4.1.1

Experiment environment

(c) Blue background

We used a library named blobdetection for processing to
trace the particles. We also limited the size of the detected
blobs to around the size of the tracer particles. We distributed 10 pieces of tracing particles in a water tank ﬁlled
with water to a depth of 5 cm. We put the water tank
in front of a display. The screen was coated with a righthanded circular polarizing sheet on the screen to make the
lights from the screen right-circularly polarized. A camera
coated with a left-handed circular polarizing sheet was installed above the water tank to track the movement of the
particles. We used a USB camera that snaps 30 images per
second, and the ﬁeld of view was limited so the camera only
captured the inside of the water tank. We caused water ﬂows
in the water tank by moving a plate from the back (far) to
the front (near). Two vortexes in opposite rotation to each
other were observed on the left and right sides of the tank.

4.1.2

Figure 16: Results of blob detection for
tracer particles having photoelasticity on
single-color backgrounds.
Darker parts

Not traceable particles

Figure 17: Tracer particles on a complex
background showing an underwater scene.
The tracer particles are recognizable, but
darker places in the background reduced the
traceability. 3 .

Results

Figure 16 shows the results of blob detection for tracer
particles made of polystyrene with simple color backgrounds.
Figure 16 (a), (b), (c), and (d) show the results with white,
green, blue, and red backgrounds, respectively. We found
that with the white and green backgrounds, the water ﬂow
tracings were stable and there were no misdetections throughout the test. However, with the blue and red backgrounds,
the tracer particles become darker, and we had to adjust the
threshold for luminosity. We found that the detection rate
depends on the angles of the particles. When the ﬂat surface of the tracer particle is close to horizontal orientation
of the camera, the tracking system can track the particle.
However, when the angle of a particle is close to a right angle, the tracking system loses the particles. The angles of
the particles continued to change in the vortex. The tracking system was able to measure the direction and speed of
the water ﬂow even though the tracing particles sometimes
became untraceable.
Figure 17 shows the results with underwater scenery. The
tracer particles are traceable in most parts of the background, but become less traceable in the darker parts of the
scene. This issue occurred with the background having an
image of the universe, as shown in Figure 18. For this background, we were unable to trace the movement of particles
using any threshold value for luminosity. When the value
was adjusted to ﬁnd darker blobs, our setup started detecting bubbles as tracer particles. Distorted tracer particles
made of polyethylene ﬁlm also showed similar characteristics to the particles made of polystyrene with photoelasticity
eﬀects.

(d) Red background

Bubbles on the water

Figure 18: Tracer particles on a dark background showing a universe scene. The tracer
particles are not functional in front of a dark
background. 4 .

4.2

Feasibility Test for Enhanced Swimming
Training

In this test, we asked two swimmers to swim in a swimming pool ﬁlled with tracing particles. One of the testers
was a trained swimmer with more than 10 years of experience, and the other was an amateur swimmer. Figure 19
3

Image taken by John Smith.
Photo title:
Universe
License:
CC
BY-SA
2.0
https://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/94908112@N07/8645017104
4
Image taken by Tetsuji Sakakibara. Photo title: 1412312 South Emma Reaf #2 6 License: CC BY-SA 2.0
https://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/tetsuji0105/16435879016

shows the test environment. More than 1,000 pieces of tracer
particles made of polyethylene were scattered in the swimming pool. We put right-handed circular polarizing sheets
on the bottom of the swimming pool. The swimming pool
displayed a video of a swimmer on the bottom with a white
background. To sustain the position of the user in the pool
even after strokes, we asked the users to wear harnesses and
to ﬁx the edge of the harness at a place outside of the pool,
as shown in Figure 20. Users swam in the swimming pool using two types of swimming styles: breaststroke and freestyle.
We found that the water ﬂow generated near the water surface was visualized by the stroke. However, with the ﬂoating
tracer particles, visualizing the water ﬂow produced at the
middle and bottom of the swimming pool by the breaststroke
was not eﬃcient. The reason is that only a few particles sank
in the water based on the swimming style. Tracer particles
made of polystyrene sunk in the water. Therefore, the particles could move in the swimming pool in accordance with
water ﬂows caused by strokes.

5.

Right circular polarizing sheets are on the
bottom screens of the swimming pool

Figure 19: Surround-screen swimming pool
ﬁlled with tracer particles.
Users swam in the swimming pool using two types
of swimming styles: breaststroke and freestyle

LIMITATIONS

The transparent tracer particles have a ﬂat shape. The
shape results in three issues. First, the tracking system
sometimes loses the visualized particles when they are vertical because they look very thin in front of the camera for
tracking. Second, ﬂat tracer particles become recognizable
when they reﬂect light from the background. In addition,
the particles tend to stick to the body of the swimmer, and
thus may reduce the swimming experience.
Ball-shaped tracer particles should solve these issues. Waterabsorptive polymers used for growing plants are shaped balls
that become quite transparent in water without requiring reﬂection. With some stress on the surface, the plastic also
shows the characteristic of photoelasticity. We suspect that
ball-shaped tracer particles made of water-absorptive polymers can solve these issues.
To visualize the water ﬂows caused by strokes, the tracing
particles need to be in the middle of the water. We also
have to invent materials that have a speciﬁc gravity closer
to that of the water.
Preparing a surround-screen swimming pool is quite expensive and time-consuming. For swimming training with
visualized water ﬂow, we can put reﬂective plates as mirrors
around the swimming pool. By emitting white light through
a polarizing sheet to the plates in the pool, people wearing
goggles coated with polarizing sheets can view the vivid colors of the tracer particles. A reﬂective object can maintain
its polarization property when the lights are reﬂected. This
enables the same situation as tracer particles placed between
two polarizing sheets.
Users might accidentally swallow the tracer particles in
the water when they breathe. Therefore, wearing a face
mask for swimming is advisable for the method. To avoid
mechanical issues in the water circulation system of the
swimming pool, placing sponges in the inlet port is recommended.

6.

More than 1,000 pieces of tracer particles made of
polyethylene were scattered in the swimming pool

CONCLUSION

We introduced a surround-screen swimming pool ﬁlled
with transparent tracer particles for water ﬂow visualization. The particles enable interactions in underwater entertainment by tracing the water ﬂow by a camera. Moreover,

Harnesses to sustain the position of the user
in the pool even after strokes

Figure 20: Feasibility test using tracer particles for swimming training.

for swimming training, users can view their swimming form
displayed on the bottom via visualized water ﬂows caused
by strokes in the swimming pool.
According to our test for checking the stability of water
ﬂow tracing, the tracer particles enable stable tracing even
with complex backgrounds. However, the traceability decreased signiﬁcantly with darker backgrounds. We found
that water ﬂow visualization caused by a swimmer’s strokes
is also possible from the feasibility test. Nevertheless, the visualization of water movement in the middle of a swimming
pool was not eﬃcient because the tracer particles tended
to ﬂoat on the surface of the water or sink to the bottom.
Further research on how to sustain the positions of tracer
particles in the middle of the water is required for swimming training support.
We used ﬂat-shaped tracer particles in this research. However, the shape of transparent tracer particles becomes visible in the water depending on their angles because of reﬂection. In addition, the particles always change their width
and height in the images because of their shape. This situation makes stable tracing diﬃcult when using a camera. As a
solution, we are planning to use ball-shaped tracer particles
with birefringence.
The reﬂective index of plastics such as polyethylene and
polystyrene are closer to that of water than air, but are nevertheless diﬀerent. For this reason, the particles are not completely invisible to the user. We can use water-absorptive
polymers as tracer particles to solve the issue. The material
becomes invisible when placed in the water, and changes its
polarization property when using two polarization sheets.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] R. J. Adrian and J. Westerweel. Particle Image
Velocimetry. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[2] M. Bächlin and G. Tröster. Swimming performance
and technique evaluation with wearable acceleration
sensors. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 8(1):68–81,
2012.
[3] F. Bruno, G. Bianco, M. Muzzupappa, S. Barone, and
A. Razionale. Experimentation of structured light and
stereo vision for underwater 3D reconstruction. ISPRS
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,
66(4):508–518, 2011.
[4] E. Ceseracciu, Z. Sawacha, S. Fantozzi, M. Cortesi,
G. Gatta, S. Corazza, and C. Cobelli. Markerless
analysis of front crawl swimming. Journal of
biomechanics, 44(12):2236–2242, 2011.
[5] R. C. Cohen, P. W. Cleary, and B. Mason.
Simulations of human swimming using Smoothed
Particle Hydrodynamics. In 7th International
conference on CFD in the minerals and process
industries, Melbourne, Australia, 2009.
[6] D. Coker, J. Reimers, and R. Watts. The infrared
absorption spectrum of water. Australian Journal of
Physics, 35(5):623–638, 1982.
[7] C. Cruz-Neira, D. J. Sandin, and T. A. DeFanti.
Surround-screen projection-based virtual reality: the
design and implementation of the CAVE. In
Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages
135–142. ACM, 1993.
[8] R. Cucchiara, C. Grana, M. Piccardi, and A. Prati.
Detecting moving objects, ghosts, and shadows in
video streams. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, 25(10):1337–1342, 2003.
[9] A. G. De Sa and G. Zachmann. Virtual reality as a
tool for veriﬁcation of assembly and maintenance
processes. Computers & Graphics, 23(3):389–403,
1999.
[10] V. N. Dubey and G. S. Grewal. Eﬃcacy of
photoelasticity in developing whole-ﬁeld imaging
sensors. Optics and Lasers in Engineering,
48(3):288–294, 2010.
[11] S. Edwards and A. Langley. On producing colours
using birefringence property of transparent, colourless
stretched cellophane. Leonardo, pages 187–190, 1981.
[12] J. G. Hay and A. M. Thayer. Flow visualization of
competitive swimming techniques: the tufts method.
Journal of biomechanics, 22(1):1119–17, 1989.
[13] J. Jacobson, M. Le Renard, J.-L. Lugrin, and
M. Cavazza. The CaveUT system: immersive
entertainment based on a game engine. In Proceedings
of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International Conference
on Advances in computer entertainment technology,
pages 184–187. ACM, 2005.
[14] S. Kato, H. Ito, T. Ichikawa, and M. Kagami. Laser
doppler velocimeter, Dec. 24 1996. US Patent
5,587,785.
[15] D. Kibira and C. McLean. Manufacturing modeling
methods: virtual reality simulation of a mechanical
assembly production line. In Proceedings of the 34th
conference on Winter simulation: exploring new
frontiers, pages 1130–1137. Winter Simulation

Conference, 2002.
[16] C. Kirmizibayrak, J. Honorio, X. Jiang, R. Mark, and
J. K. Hahn. Digital analysis and visualization of
swimming motion. International Journal of Virtual
Reality, 10(3):9, 2011.
[17] H. Koike, Y. Matoba, and Y. Takahashi. AquaTop
display: interactive water surface for viewing and
manipulating information in a bathroom. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international conference
on Interactive tabletops and surfaces, pages 155–164.
ACM, 2013.
[18] J.-M. Lavest, G. Rives, and J.-T. Lapresté. Dry
camera calibration for underwater applications.
Machine Vision and Applications, 13(5-6):245–253,
2003.
[19] A. Melling. Tracer particles and seeding for particle
image velocimetry. Measurement Science and
Technology, 8(12):1406, 1997.
[20] R. Morales, P. Keitler, P. Maier, and G. Klinker. An
underwater augmented reality system for commercial
diving operations. In OCEANS 2009, pages 1–8.
IEEE, 2009.
[21] F. Mueller, S. Stellmach, S. Greenberg, A. Dippon,
S. Boll, J. Garner, R. Khot, A. Naseem, and
D. Altimira. Proxemics play: understanding proxemics
for designing digital play experiences. In Proceedings
of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive
systems, pages 533–542. ACM, 2014.
[22] H. Mueller. Theory of the photoelastic eﬀect of cubic
crystals. Physical review, 47(12):947, 1935.
[23] M. Nakashima and A. Takahashi. Clariﬁcation of
unsteady ﬂuid forces acting on limbs in swimming
using an underwater robot arm. Journal of Fluid
Science and Technology, 7(1):114–128, 2012.
[24] K. Nitta, T. Sato, H. Koike, and T. Nojima.
PhotoelasticBall: a touch detectable ball using
photoelasticity. In Proceedings of the 5th Augmented
Human International Conference, page 16. ACM,
2014.
[25] W. L. Raﬀe, M. Tamassia, F. Zambetta, X. Li, S. J.
Pell, and F. F. Mueller. Player-computer interaction
features for designing digital play experiences across
six degrees of water contact. In Proceedings of the
2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human
Interaction in Play, pages 295–305. ACM, 2015.
[26] T. Sato, H. Mamiya, H. Koike, and K. Fukuchi.
PhotoelasticTouch: transparent rubbery tangible
interface using an LCD and photoelasticity. In
Proceedings of the 22nd annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology, pages 43–50.
ACM, 2009.
[27] G.-K. Tan, G.-X. Shen, S.-Q. Huang, W.-H. Su, and
Y. Ke. Investigation of ﬂow mechanism of a robotic
ﬁsh swimming by using ﬂow visualization
synchronized with hydrodynamic force measurement.
Experiments in Fluids, 43(5):811–821, 2007.
[28] T. Treibitz, Y. Schechner, C. Kunz, and H. Singh. Flat
refractive geometry. IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, 34(1):51–65, 2012.
[29] Y. Ukai and J. Rekimoto. Swimoid: a swim support
system using an underwater buddy robot. In
Proceedings of the 4th Augmented Human

International Conference, pages 170–177. ACM, 2013.
[30] S. Yamashita, X. Zhang, T. Miyaki, and J. Rekimoto.
AquaCAVE: An Underwater Immersive Projection
System for Enhancing the Swimming Experience. In
D. Reiners, D. Iwai, and F. Steinicke, editors,
ICAT-EGVE 2016 - International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Reality and Telexistence and Eurographics
Symposium on Virtual Environments. The
Eurographics Association, 2016.
[31] S. Yamashita, X. Zhang, and J. Rekimoto.
AquaCAVE: Augmented Swimming Environment with
Immersive Surround-Screen Virtual Reality. In
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, pages 183–184.
ACM, 2016.

